            1 2 The Relationship Between
                     Children's Health and
                     Intellectual Development
                     Linda N. Edwards
                     Michael Grossman


       The focus of this paper is on functional health status
of children in the population. More specifically, we examine
a single aspect of functional health status—-intellectual de-
velopment of children.* In a rnultivariate context, we examine
the relationships between the health indexes and cognitive de-
velopment of children from six to 11 years of age in Cycle II
of the U.S. Health Examination Survey (HES). We present the
first set of such estimates for a representative sample of
non-institutionalized white children in the United States.
We compare them with existing findings for underdeveloped
countries, Great Britain, and low income families in the
United States.

       In choosing to study intellectual development, we are
adopting the view (similar to Haggerty and others, 1975;
Mushkin 1977) that the benefits from investments in chil-
dren's health should not be restricted to the usual narrow
list of increases in longevity, decreases in morbidity, and
reductions in curative medical care outlays. Indeed, we have
come to believe that enhanced intellectual development is an
important source of benefits from investments in children's
health. While our results do not themselves provide suf-
ficient information for a full cost—benefit analysis of ex-
penditures on child health, they do contain policy-relevant
insights about potential benefits in terms of "physical"
(cognitive development) units.




*   For a partial survey of the literature on relationships
    among earnings, schooling, health, and intelligence of
    adults and children, see Grossman (1975)



                              273
274                                HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


I. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK AND CURRENT LITERATURE

       Whenever decision makers, such as firms or households,
must allocate scarce resources among competing goals, eco-
nomists can provide useful insights into their behavior.
Parent—child relationships clearly involve such allocation.
While it is not easy to define what is meant by the "well-
being of children, factors such as their health, intelli-
gence, school performance, school attainment, social be-
havior, and lifetime earnings undoubtedly play an important
role. To enhance any of these components of children's wel-
fare, parents must allocate to their children some part of
their own limited resources-—their own time or goods and
services purchased in the market.

       Our analytical framework is based on two propositions.
One is the above notion that parents must allocate scarce re-
sources between a child's well—being (the child's life
"quality") and other competing goals. These competing goals
include not only the parents' own consumption, but also the
consumption of other children in the family. This framework
builds upon the important distinction between the quantity
and "quality" of children that is stressed in much of the
literature on the economics of fertility and optimum family
size (for example, Becker and Lewis, 1973; Willis, 1973;
O'Hara, 1975). The second proposition, embedded in the house-
hold production function approach to consumer behavior, is
that consumers produce their basic objects of choice with
their own time and inputs of goods and services purchased in
the market (Becker, 1965; Lancaster, 1966; Muth, 1966) .  This
insight is of particular relevance in dealing with children's
health and cognitive development because parents do not buy
these objects of choice directly in the market.

       Cognitive development of children can be perceived by
applying a multivariate production function. This production
function would involve such factors as time inputs of the
child and of his parents and teachers; the child's genetic
endowment; his current and past health; and various aspects
of the child's school and home environment, the latter shaped
to a large extent by parents. For example, it has been sug-
gested that an increase in parents' schooling (one important
aspect of the home environment) makes parents more efficient
in the transmission of knowledge to their children (see
Grossman, l97S, 1972; Leibowitz, 1974; Michael, 1972) . The
production function of cognitive development interacts with
parents' income and their preferences at various prices to
determine the level of cognitive development of each of
their children.

       With regard to the specific role of children's health
in the above framework, it is widely recognized that poor
health can pose a threat to the cognitive development of
children (Wallace, 1962; Birch and Gussow, 1970). Health
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                        275


problems can limit the amount of information acquired in the
home and in school by reducing the amount of time available
to acquire such information, as well as by reducing the amount
acquired in a given period of time. Ultimately, intelligence,
years of formal schooling comuleted, earnings, and other
measures of well—being in adulthood can be affected by poor
health in childhood. Yet the empirical work in this area is
sparse. In fact, Birch and Gussow (1970) , whose book focuses
on the effects of health on learning, point out that most of
the evidence they bring to bear on the issue is indirect be-
cause "...there has been little investigation of the specific
relationships between the physical status of poor children
and either their mental development or their school achieve-
ment" (p. 10) . In the rest of this section, we highlight the
literature that suggests a relationship between various as-
pects of children's health and their cognitive development.
The studies cited here, as well as others, are discussed in
greater detail in section III.

       Most of the literature relating health to the intel-
lectual development of children focuses on the effects of mal-
nutrition. Pediatricians argue that malnutrition in early
childhood can inhibit intellectual development because a brain
growth spurt occurs in the first two years of human life, dur-
ing which time the interneural network is formed (Scrimshaw
and Gordon, 1968; Lewin, 1975) .  Deficient diets at this time
can slow the spurt and thereby permanently affect intellectual
development. Since early brain growth is largely a process
of protein synthesis, a diet that is deficient in this
nutrient may be especially damaging. In fact, a number of
studies in underdeveloped and developing economies show that
children who were severely malnourished in infancy have below
average mental capacity (as measured by intelligence quotient
(IQ) or similar tests) , language proficiency, school per-
formance, and adaptive capacity at subsequent ages (Scrimshaw
and Gordon, 1968; Birch and Gussow, 1970; Correa, 1975;
Stoch and Smythe, 1976) . Moreover, members of the mal-
nourished group tend to be shorter and thinner and to have
smaller head circumferences than their well—nourished peers,
sometimes even after having recovered from the spell of mal-
nutrition. Richardson (1976) and others caution, however,
that conclusions drawn from these studies are suggestive,
rather than definitive, because malnourished children grow
up in an environment with a substantial number of obstacles
besides inadequate nutrient intake that could slow intel-
lectual growth.

       Mild or moderate malnutrition in school age children
has been less frequently studied and has less dramatic ef—
fects. It has been associated with poor judgment, inat-
tention, and a heightened risk of illness, all of which might
ultimately affect intellectual development (Birch and Gussow,
1970; Heller and Drake, 1976; Popkin and Lim-Ybanez, 1977).
These findings are especially relevant for the United States
because, while we do not experience much severe malnutrition,
276                                HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?

researchers still report substantial variations in nutri-
tional adequacy (Christakis, 1968; Center for Disease Con-
trol, 1972; Acosta, 1974; Driskel and Price, 1974; Owen,
1974; Sims and Morris, 1974; Endozien and others, 1976).

       The relationship between intellectual development and
other dimensions of children's health is documented in a
variety of studies. Birch and Gussow (1970) reviewed the evi-
dence that low birth weight and prematurity can have detri-
mental effects on the later intellectual development of chil-
dren. Wallace (1962) and Kessner (1974) mentioned a few
small studies that relate health problems, such as hearing
loss, to poor school achievement. }iaggerty, Roghmann, and
Pless (1975) discussed the impact of chronic conditions on
school attendance and performance in a sample of Rochester,
New York children (but reached few definitive conclusions)
Leveson, Ullman, and Wassall (1969) cited a number of studies
indicating that about five to seven percent of persons drop-
ping out of high school in the United States have done so
primarily because of illness. Grossman (1975) found that the
self-rated status of students during years of high school at-
tendance has a positive effect on years of college completed.
Cooney (1977) summarized evidence tentatively suggesting that
deficient intellectual development due to poor health might
lead, ultimately, to juvenile delinquency and other forms
of deviant behavior. In sum, these studies strongly sug-
gest the existence of positive effects of good health and
nutrition on intellectual development.

       In the above brief review of the literature, we have
repeatedly used the phrase "effect of health on intellectual
development"; further, in section III we employ health mea-
sures as independent variables in ordinary least squares
multiple regressions with IQ or school achievement as the
dependent variable. Yet it would be a mistake to interpret
the findings that we have mentioned in this section, or the
statistically significant health effects that we report in
section III, as indisputable evidence of causal relationships
running from health to cognitive development. There are at
least three plausible alternative interpretations.    (1) Our
statistical results might partially reflect causality that
runs from cognitive development to health. For example,
Miller (1974) reports a negative correlation between in-
telligence and accidents, a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in children, in his study of children in Newcastle
Upon Tyne, England. He interprets IQ as the causal agent
in this correlation.   (2) Statistically significant effects
of health on IQ might be due to the omission from the re-
gression analysis of genetic and environmental factors that
are common to both health and cognitive development (al-
though in our work we try to control for as many of these as
possible).   (3) Certain relationships that we report might
not partially or even totally reflect health effects at all.
To cite one illustration, breast—feeding might foster the
development of the brain and the central nervous system and
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                           277

reduce the risk of illness, thus promoting intellectual
development during the first year of life.* On the other
hand, breast—feeding might simply serve as a proxy measure of
both the amount of time mothers spend with their children and
families preferences for children.
       It would also be a mistake to interpret the findings
in this section solely on the basis of environmental effect
as opposed to genetic effect. Without becoming involved in
the controversy concerning the relative importance of
heredity and environment in the determination of IQ, we wish
to point out that our health indexes have both genetic and
environmental components. For instance, part of the varia-
tion in birth weight can be attributed to a woman's knowledge
of appropriate practices during pregnancy and to the amount
and quality of the prenatal care she receives, while part of
the variation is genetic. In addition, genetic differences
may induce environmental changes. That is, parents may re-
spond to the inherited characteristics of children by either
compensating or reinforcing the effects of a favorable or un-
favorable inherltance.** In the empirical work reported be-
low, we malce only a modest effort to sort out the separate
effects of heredity and environment. Nevertheless, as long
as some portion of the variability in our health indexes and
IQ measures can be attributed to environmental influences,
our findings will have relevance for public policy.
Bloom's (1964) penetrating survey of studies of the develop-
ment of various human characteristics provides a compelling
reason to believe that the relationships we uncover are not
solely genetic, but reflect environmental influences as well.
Bloom also points out that the development of IQ and achieve-
ment occurs early in the life cycle, but he summarizes evi-
dence that suggests that 50 percent of the development of IQ
measured at age 17 takes place after age four, while 67 per-
cent of the development of general achievement measured at
age 18 takes place after age six.

       In sunimary, the aim of our empirical research is to
uncover significant health-IQ and health—achievement relation-
ships rather than to establish causality or to provide defin-
itive interpretations of these relationships. We adopt this
strategy because none of our techniques represents a con-
trolled experiment and because we lack knowledge about the
underlying structure that generates the sample observations.
The causal nature of the relationships that we uncover can be
established by other persons with different samples and
methods. However, our findings can serve as a useful first
step in an assessment of government policies with respect to

 *   See section III for references.
**   For more detailed discussions of the effects of endow-
     ments on optimal investments in children by parents, see
     Becker and Tomes (1976) and Edwards and Grossman (1977).
278                                 HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?

children. Our task is to fill a gap in the existing litera-
ture by documenting relationships, in a multivariate context,
between health and cognitive development for a representative
sample of white children in the United States.


II. DATA AND MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES


The Data Set

        As mentioned before, our data set is Cycle II of the
HES conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics
 (NCHS, 1967a). Cycle II is a nationally representative
sample of 7,119 non-institutionalized children aged six
to 11 years, examined over the 1963-65 period.* This sample
is an exceptionally rich source of information about chil-
dren's health, their intellectual development, and the char-
acteristics of their families. More specifically, the data
comprise each child's complete medical and developmental his-
tories provided by the parent, birth certificate facts, in-
formation on family socioeconomic characteristics, and a
school report with information on current school performance
and classroom behavior provided by teachers or other school
officials. Most important, there are objective measures of
health from detailed physical examinations, and there are also
scores on psychological (including vocabulary and achievement)
tests. The physical examinations and the psychological tests
were administered by the Public Health Service.

       Although the sample contains children of all races, we
restrict our analysis to white children only. This procedure
allows us to avoid the problem associated with potential
"cultural biases" in IQ and achievement tests. These biases
could also be dealt with by separately analyzing the data for
white and black children. (Indeed, in preliminary estimation,
there were statistically significant racial differences in the
set of variable coefficients so that separate estimates by
race would be called for in any case.) Separate analysis is
not undertaken for blacks, however, because the black sample
is too small to permit reliable coefficient estimates. The
full Cycle II sample contains 6,100 whites, 987 blacks, and
32 "others."

       Our sample is further limited by excluding children
who do not live with both of their natural or adoptive
parents or for whom there were missing data. (Information
most typically absent were birth weight, school absenteeism,
and income, with a disproportionate number of missing data
from families where a foreign language is spoken in the home.)

*   For a full description of the sample, the sampling techni-
    que, and the data collection, see NCHS (l967a).
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                          279


Children who live with foster parents, stepparents, guardians,
or single, widowed, or divorced parents are excluded to con-
trol for the effects of marital instability. Examination of
the excluded observations indicates that they have
lower IQ and achievement scores and poorer health. Thus, our
final sample of 3,599 children may be regarded as an ad-
vantaged subgroup of the Cycle II data set. Regression re-
sults are reported for boys and girls pooled because coef-
ficient estimates were not found to differ significantly by
sex.

       The IQ, achievement, and health variables are defined
in table 1. Means and standard deviations of these variables
are shown in Appendix table A-2.


Measures of Health

        The issue of how to measure children's health is very
much an unresolved one, even among professionals in the area
of public health.* Recent studies of children's health in
the United States have used data taken from one or more of
the following categories: measures of disability, measures
related to the incidence of abnormal conditions, and measures
derived from parental assessments of children's health
(Wallace, 1962; Mechanic, 1964; Mindlin and Lobach, 1971;
Talbot and others, 1971; Kaplan and others, 1972; Hu, 1973;
Schack and Starfield, 1973; Kessner, 1974; Haggerty and
others, 1975; Inman, 1976) .  Although we followed the prece-
dent of these earlier studies, some of the above measures
 (disability and the incidence of certain physical conditions)
are not entirely appropriate because we wanted measures of
the child's 'permanent' state of health (his prospect for life
preservation and normal functioning) rather than short—run
deviations from that permanent state. Much childhood dis-
ability results from the natural sequence of childhood
diseases and acute conditions that do not reflect on the
child's permanent state of health. Of course, there is a
positive correlation between the two in the sense that a
child with poor permanent health is more likely to contract
acute conditions and to have them for a more extended time
period. **




 * This     is true not only for children's health, but also for
       adult's health. Sullivan (1966), Berg (1973), and Ware
       (1976) discuss the general issue of measuring health; and
       Starfield (1975) and Schack and Starfield (1973) focus on
       the specific problem of measuring children's health.
**     Birch and Gussow (1970) discuss how nutrition (clearly a
       determinant of permanent health status) and disease are
       intimately related.
280                                     HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Table 1.       Definition of Health Variables and Cognitive
               Development.




Variable name                  Definition                  Source a/


A. Cognitive development
      WISC           Child's IQ as measured by vocabu-
                     lary and block design of the
                     Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
                     Children, standardized -by the mean
                     and standard deviation of four—
                     month age cohorts                         4

      WRAT           Child's school achievement as mea-
                     sured by the reading and arithmetic
                     subtests of the Wide Range Achieve-
                     ment Test, standardized by the mean
                     and standard deviation of six-month
                     age cohorts                               4

B. Past health
      LIGHT1         Dummy variable that equals one if
                     child's birth weight was under 2,000
                     grams (4.4 pounds)                        2

      LIGHT2         Dummy variable that equals one if
                     child's birth weight was equal to
                     or greater than 2,000 grams but
                     under 2,500 grams (5.5 pounds)            2

      BFED           Dummy variable that equals one if
                     the child was breast-fed                  1

      LMAG           Dummy variable that equals one if
                     the mother was less than 20 years
                     old at birth of child                     1

      HMAG3S         Dummy variable that equals one if
                     the mother was more than 35 years
                     old at birth of child                     1

      HNAG4O         Dummy variable that equals one if
                     the mother was 40 years old or more
                     at birth of child                         1
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                            281


Table 1. Definition of Health Variables and Cognitive
          Development. (Continued)



Variable name            Definition                   Source

   FYPH         Dummy variable that equals one if
                parental assessment of child's
                health at one year was poor or fair,
                and zero if it was good
C. Current health
   SEEG         Dummy variable that equals one if
                uncorrected binocular distance is
                abnormal and child usually wears
                glasses                                  3,1
   NSEEG        Dummy variable that equals one if
                uncorrected binocular distance
                vision is normal and child usually
                wears glasses                            3,1
   NRMI\L       Dummy variable that equals one if
                uncorrected binocular distance
                vision is normal and child does not
                wear glasses                             3,1
   IHEAR        Dummy variable that equals one if
                hearing is abnormal                      3

   ABN          Dummy variable that equals one if
                physician finds a "significant
                abnormality" in examining the child
                (other than an abnormality result-
                ing from an accident or injury)
   IHEIGHT      Height, standardized by the mean
                and standard deviation of one—year
                age-sex cohorts                          3
   IWEIGHT      Weight, standardized by the mean
                and standard deviation of one—year
                age—sex cohorts                          3

   IDECAY       Number of decayed primary and
                permanent teeth, standardized by
                the mean and standard deviation
                of one—year age—sex cohorts              3
282                                       HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Table 1.      Definition of Health Variables and Cognitive
              Development. (Continued)



Variable name                Definition                Source a/


      PFHEALTH      Dummy variable that equals one
                    if parental assessment of child's
                    health is poor or fair and zero
                    if assessment is good or very good       1

      PFGHEALTH Dummy variable that equals one if
                 parental assessment of child's
                 health is poor, fair, or good
                 and zero if assessment is very good         1

      ACC           Dummy variable that equals one if
                    parent reported that the child had
                    one or more accidents from infancy
                    to the present                           1

       SCHABS       Dummy variable that equals one if
                    child has been excessively absent
                    from school for health reasons
                    during the past six months               5

D.    Alternative current health
      and current weight measures

       TALL         Dummy variable that equals one if
                    child's height is greater than two
                    standard deviations above the mean
                    for the relevant age-sex cohort          3

       SHORT        Dummy variable that equals one if
                    child's height is two standard de-
                    viations or more below the mean for
                    the relevant age-sex cohort              3

       FAT          Dummy variable that equals one if
                    child's weight is greater than two
                    standard deviations above the mean
                    for the relevant age—sex cohort          3

       THIN         Dummy variable that equals one if
                    child's weight is two standard de-
                    viations or more below the mean for
                    the relevant age—sex cohort              3

 a! The sources are 1 = medical history form completed by
     parent, 2 = birth certificate, 3 = physical examination,
     4 = psychological examination, 5 = school form.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                           283

       In some situations, a single overall health index
might be desired--to parsimoniously describe the health
status of a population, or to provide a guide for the alloca-
tion of public funds, for example. However, use of a single
health index in this study would conceal, rather than reveal,
a number of important associations of special policy rele-
vance. This is because the various components of health that
we studied (described below) reflect different dimensions of
overall health status, and there is no reason to believe that
these components of health status all interact with IQ and
achievement in exactly the same way.

       A total of 13 dimensions are used as descriptive of
health status and these are represented by 19 health var-
iables. These variables are defined precisely in table 1.
They are divided into two subsets: a set of past health
measures and a set of current health measures. Past health
measures refer to the child's health prior to the health
examination survey (they relate primarily to the child's
infancy), while the current measures refer to health at the
time of the examination. Some of these variables are self—
explanatory and some are further clarified below:

       (1)  Breast—feeding contributes to the nutritional
status of infants and, therefore, is used as an index of
early nutrition (see, for example, Mata, 1978). In addition,
infants receive from their mothers' milk antibodies that help
protect them from acute illnesses during infancy. Whether or
not the child was breast-fed is denoted by the dummy variable
MBFED.

        (2) Mother's age at the time of birth, represented by
three dummy variables (LMAG, HMAG35, and HMAG4O) , iscon-
sidered a measure of health in infancy because relatively
older mothers have been found to have a greater frequency of
infants in poor health, while relatively younger mothers,
though they may be in better physical health, are more likely
to have unwanted conceptions and consequently seek less pre-
natal care.

         (3) Uncorrected binocular distance vision is defined
as abnormal if it is worse than 20/30 (NCHS, 1972a) .   All
children were examined without glasses. Therefore, the
vision variables (SEEG, NSEEG, NRMAL) distinguish four cate-
gories of children: those with abnormal vision who wear
glasses (SEEG), those with normal vision who wear glasses
(NSEEG), those with normal vision who do not wear glasses
(NRMAL) , and those with abnormal vision who do not wear
glasses (the omitted category)

       (4) A child is defined as having abnormal hearing
(denoted IHEAR) if, in his best ear, the average threshold
decibel reading over the range of 500, 1,000, and 2,000
cycles per second (cps) is greater than 15. These are the
284                                 HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


frequencies that occur most frequently in normal speech. A
threshold of less than 15 decibels above audiometric zero at
these frequencies is classified as corresponding to "no sig-
nificant difficulty with faint speech" by the Committee on
Conservation of Hearing of the American Academy of Ophthal-
mology and Otolaryngology (NCHS, l970a).

       (5) "Significant abnormalities" reported by the ex-
amining physician include heart disease (congenital or ac-
quired); neurological; muscular, or joint conditions; other
congenital abnormalities; and other major diseases. The
presence of one or more of these abnormalities is denoted by
the variable ABN.

        (6)  Current height and weight are standard indicators
of children's nutritional status (for example, NCHS, l970b,
1975; Seoane and Latham, 1971); and good nutrition is an ob-
vious and natural vehicle for maintaining children's health.
It is well-known that physical growth rates differ by age
and sex. Therefore, for any observation, our height variable
 (denoted IHEIGHT) is the difference between the child's actual
height and the mean height for his age-sex group divided by
the standard deviation of height for that age-sex group.
Current weight (denoted IWEIGHT) is computed in a similar
manner. The use of the variables IHEIGHT and IWEIGHT is con-
sistent with the view that the relationships among nutrition,
IQ, and achievement are continuous ones; these variables make
our results comparable with those of several other studies
discussed in section III. We do, however, show how the es-
timated effects are altered when discrete height and weight
dummy variables (TALL, SHORT, FAT, THIN) replace the con-
tinuous variables. An advantage of using the discrete forms
of these variables is that it allows for non—monotonic re-
 lationships between height or weight and IQ.

       (7)  The number of decayed permanent and primary teeth
(denoted IDECAY), adjusted for age and sex, as are height and
weight, is interpreted as an additional measure of nutrition
and a correlate of basic components of health that affect
cognitive development but are difficult to measure.


Measures of Cognitive Development
       In relating health indexes to cognitive development,
two measures are used as alternative dependent variables: an
IQ measure derived from two subtests of the Wechsler Intel-
ligence Scale for Children (WISC) and a school achievement
measure derived from the reading and arithmetic subtests of
the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT).   Both measures are
scaled to have means of 100 and standard deviations of 15 for
each age—group (four—month cohorts are used for WISC and six—
month cohorts are used for WRAT).   The inadequacies of these
variables as indexes of overall intellectual development are
 HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                      285


well-known. Nevertheless, they continue to be widely used be-
cause they provide readily obtainable tests that are roughly
comparable across a diverse population.

       WISC is a common IQ test, similar to (and highly cor-
related with results from) the Stanford—Binet IQ test (NCHS,
1972b). The full test consists of 12 subtests, but only two
of these were administered in the HES. The IQ estimates,
based on the vocabulary and block design subtests, are very
highly correlated with those based on all 12 subtests (NCHS,
l972b). WRAT is a single achievement test that can be given
to children of varying ages. In particular, the same test
was given to all children in the HES except the 12-year olds.
The latter group is excluded from our sample. The two tests
used in the HES were found to '. . . have reasonably good con-
struct validity as judged by their relationship to conven-
tional achievement tests" (NCHS, l967b)


Other Independent Variables

       All regressions include a basic set of non—health—
related variables. These variables are sex of child, whether
the child is the first born in the family, whether the child
is a twin, whether the child attended kindergarten or nursery
school; other variables include size of family, years of
formal schooling completed by the mother and by the father,
labor force status of the mother, family income, whether a
foreign language is spoken in the home, region of residence,
and size of place of residence. These variables are defined
in more detail in Appendix table A—2. We do not discuss their
effects on IQ or school achievement in this paper, but it
should be realized that all estimated health effects control
for (hold constant) the effects of these variables.

III. RESULTS

Overview

       Ordinary least squares multiple regression equations
for the dependent variables WISC (IQ) and WRAT (school
achievement) are given in Appendix table A-3. When WRAT is
the dependent variable, two equations are estimated. The
first contains the same set of independent variables as the
WISC regression, while the second includes WISC as an ad-
ditional independent variable. If variations in IQ as mea-
sured by WISC are due mainly to genetic factors, the second
regression will give a more accurate picture of the effect
of environmental factors on school achievement than the
first. Of course, WISC has both an environmental and a
genetic component. Therefore, the two WRAT regressions may
be regarded as estimates, both upper and lower bound, of
286                                  HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


the impact of environmental factors on school achievement.*

       Table 2 contains coefficient estimates of the 19 past
and current health indexes. In general, IQ and achievement
are positively related to positive correlates of health, and
many have statistically significant effects on IQ and school
achievement. The effects of health on school achievement
are reduced in absolute value when IQ is held constant, but
the pattern of statistical significance is not dramatically
altered. In particular, only the coefficients of the number
of decayed permanent and primary teeth (IDECAY) and of birth
weight between 2,000 and 2,500 grains (LIGHT2) become
insignificant.

Past Health Effects
       Birth weight.--The results in table 2 suggest that low
birth weight, especially under 2,000 grams (under 4.4 pounds),
is damaging to subsequent intellectual development. For ex-
ample, these coefficients imply that everything else being
equal, a child who weighed under 2,000 grams at birth has an
IQ four to five points lower on average than a child of normal
weight at birth.** This magnitude is about one—third of a
standard deviation in the WISC measure. Corresponding coef-
ficients for WRAT imply that low birth weight is associated
with a deficiency of more than one—half a standard deviation
in the achievement measure. Somewhat surprisingly, absolute
effects are at least as large in the high income sample as in
the low income sample (see table 3).

        The important effects of birth weight have been noted
in a number of studies (see Birch and Gussow, 1970, for a
review) , though not in a multivariate context using a large
representative sample. Studies of the effects of birth weight
on IQ or achievement by income or social class are less com-
mon. Examples are Drillien (1964); Wiener (1965); and Davie
and others (1972) .   In general, these studies report



 *    If WRAT embodies genetic variations in ability that are
      not captured by WISC, the equation with WISC held constant
      would no longer provide a lower bound estimate of the
      effect of environmental factors on WRAT.
**    Cycle II does not distinguish children who are born pre-
      maturely, so we cannot determine to what extent low
      birth weight is a result of prematurity or of other
      factors. The coefficients of LIGHT1 and LIGHT2 reflect
      the average effects of prematurity and of low birth
      weight for full-term infants.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                                                                                                   287



                         -

                                CD     N N
                                      CD       0)' CD m CD 'O O CD H N C Ifl
                             c' CD H CD 0)' 0) CD CD H CD 0)' CD (fi CD C CD -4 CD
                                                                                                             fl

                             CDCDCDCDCDHCD-CD
                                          ----                                                                       4
                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                     '-4
                                                                                                                     ci)



                                                                                                                     ci)
                                                                                                                     H
                 00
                 00)                                                                                                 4).4)
                -,-4   ,-4    fl CD N L( CD In  0)' CD N CD 0)' H a)                       Lfl C N ((0       ¼0      0 10
                 (0    0     H CD N CD N CD a) CD 0)'       -a' CD N                       CD H H 1(0                (1) 0)
 (01            (0-4                                                                                                 li-I-)
   •
                 (04-c
                1-14-4
                             I         ii Nil INNI
                                                ii
                                                   INI Ii                                                        •




                0
                                                   I                                             I
 (ci            t30)
 0              (DO                                                                                                          —4.0
 0
                                                                                                                             ((I '-4
 (0
 ci)
                                                                                                                     4-11(0
 (I)
 I-i                         -.------—------------
                             N    a) (fi 10     CD O (fi CO O                   ((0 N N 10 CD a) 10
                                                                                                                     cii
                                                                                                                     .0
                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                             4.) .1
 Ii)                         H CD         CD 10 0)' CD H N N CO             '
                                                                                HN              CD N N 10            .4-)            0
                                                                                                                             (00)
                             CDHCDCDNa)CDHN('1(.CDC'(CflNCDCDCD
                                               HN——--,--4N--N
                                                            —---
                                                                                                                     4)
                                                                                                                     0)00           '0
                                                                                                                       00)
                                                                                                                     (I)             0.

                       4.)                                                                                           '-4•0
O

0
H
 0
(0
H
 (0
                00
                (0—I •.
                00)
                 -1
                (0 0
                0) 4-1
                1-14-c
                00)
                (110
                        -4
                             N 0)
                             I     I
                                          (fi 10 C'-) a) 0) '.0 (')

                                           I   HaH
                                                   II liii
                                                                       N
                                                           H .—i a) m -4 I
                                                                                N
                             a) N a) CD CD (fi '.0 CD '.0 ( CD '.0 H N CD 0) N CD
                                                                                ,—4 C'-)       ' '.0 c' N
                                                                                                N
                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                     I   I
                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                     (0(fl-,-4

                                                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                                     ,—4
                                                                                                                     0)4J0)
                                                                                                                      00)
                                                                                                                     --40)0
                                                                                                                             '0
                                                                                                                             0 0)
                                                                                                                             0)
                                                                                                                                     0



 (0
                                                                                                                     44(0
                                                                                                                     --4            1-4

H40)

                                                                                                                     0(1)
.0                                                                                                                     HO)
 (0                                                                                                                   401 H (I)
--4                               0) 10   N    N ('-0 (0   '
                                                               CD   a) (0   '
                                                                                CO H '.0 ('4         N N H           .0 0) '0
                                                                                                                              (H00
 1.4                         N a) N H If) CD N N N a) 0) N '.0 (0 H H CD H CD                                        E-'     .4.)
 (0                                                                                                              .
                             CD           CD '.0 0) (0 CD 0) CD H 0) CD N N H CD CD CD
.0
                                               H---------- H H—---                                                       •   00
                                                                                                                             (1)




4.)
                                                                                                                     COOH
H                                                                                                                    0)4J(0
 0)

                                                                                                                      0)0.0
         0
 40)



         (1)    004)                                                                                                 H04
                                                                                                                     .0
4-1
0        H     040)
         (0 H -'-4           N N a) '.0           N '.0 0 '.0 fl In         H   N (0 0) (0 '.0 N C)
                                                                                                                     0)0)0
                                                                                                                     4.) '.0 0
                CI)    0     CO   a) '.0 10 0) H CD a) 0) '.0 (0 N N N H 0 N CD                                                •    -'-I
U)              (0—I
4)
0
                (1)
                1-14-4
                       4-1   I    HH
                                                   II
                                          I H 10 N H N I (0 N I
                                                                        II          H      I    H        I   I       >1
                                                                                                                     -10)0J
                                                                                                                                     (0


                0
                                   I                           I                                 I

 0)             1140)
-'-4            0)0                                                                                                  00)11
 0                                                                                                                   0)              0)
-'-1

4-1
                                                                                                                     0.0
(I)
o0              4)
                                                                                                                             00
                                                                                                                             (40



                0                                                                                                    0)4-1
                40)0)
                                                                                E-'E-'Ea
  •             'OH
C')             0.0                                                                   E-                             000)
                40)0)                  100
                                       (fl HN                                                                (0      0---40)
H40)


.0
 00
                Q.---l
                0J1
                OE ElZ HH
                '000
                 H
                                           E-cE-c

                                                                       ZEQ(J
                                                                       0OQ1.E.O0
                                                                                HHOE)H
                                                                                                                     cJ)(cim

                                                                                                                     '.
                                                                                                                     0)1            .01
Table   3.   Coefficients of Health Variables in WISC or WHAT Regressions with Family Income—-
             Health Interactions, a!


                       FYPH     LMAG     HMAG35    HMAG4O         MBFED        LIGHT1    LIGHT2    SEEG       NSEEG
Dependent variable


                                         Family income   <     $7,000
WISC                     .78    —1.95      2.40     —1.35               1.70    —3.74     —1.37       .04      —3.11
                       (0.62)   (3.96)    (4.74)    (0.56)          (7.65)      (2.08)    (1.07)    (0.991)    (2.76)

WHAT                     .08     —.41      1.23      —.36               1.73    —8.18     —1.84     —1.63      —2.62
                       (0.01)   (0.20)    (1.40)    (0.04)          (8.97)     (11.17)    (2.18)    (O.'6)     (2.20)

                        —.26      .44       .17          .24          .99       —6.54     —1.24     —1.65      —1.25
     b/
WHAT —
                       (0.10)   (0.29)    (0.04)    (0.03)          (3.70)      (9.10)   (l.27)     (1.26)     (0.64)

                                         Family income         $7,000                                                   '-3


                                -1.38       .95       .15               2.07    —6.20     —4.42      1.84      -2.40
WISC                   —2.05
                       (2.99)   (0.84)    (0.78)    (0.01)         (10.11)      (6.01)    (7.39)    (1.35)     (1.65)

                                —1.67      —.20      —.85               1.31   —10.38     —2.36      1.91       -.63
WHAT                    —.91
                       (0.66)   (1.38)    (0.04)    (0.19)          (4.58)     (18.94)    (2.78)    (1.63)     (0.13)

WHAT b/                 —.004   —1.06      —.61      —.92             .40       —7.65      -.42      1.10        .43
     —                                                                         (13.13)    (0.10)    (0.69)     (0.08)
                       (0.00) (0.72)      (0.46)    (0.28)          (0.55)
                                                                                                                        '-3




                                                                                                                        0
Table 3.    Coefficients of Health Variables in WISC or WHAT Regressions with Family Income—-
            Health Interactions. a/ (Continued)



Dependent
variable       NRMAL     IHEAR       ABN      IWEIGHT       IHEIGHT       IDECAY        PFHEALTH    PFGHEALTH   ACC       SCHABS


                                                         Family income   <    $7,000
wisc            —1.31     —1.64      —2.14     —.59           1.78            —.94       —1.88         .002      —.47       1.51
                (0.94)    (0.26)     (4.64)    (2.18)        (19.18)         (11.51)      (2.13)     (0.00)     (0.38)     )l.39i

WHAT            —1.49     —7.36      —3.32     —.34           1.90            —.68       —2.55       —.44        —.26        .65
                (1.37>    (5. 80)   (12.56)    (0. 81)       (24.65)          (6. 78)     (4.40)     (0.62)     (0.13)     (0.29)

WHAT   b/        —.91     —6.65      —2.38     —.08            1.12           —.27       —1.72       —.44        —.05       —.01
                (0.66)    (6.04)     (8.23)    (0.06)        (10.86)          (1.33)      (2.57)     (0.79)     (0.01)     (0.00)

                                                         Family income        $7,000
WISC             —.45     —8.57      —2.57       .16            .63           —.56        —.08         .27        .04     —2.57
                (0.12)    (3.59)     (5.27)    (0.16)        (2.27)          (2.15)       (0.002)    (0.18)     (0.002)    (2.62)

WHAT           —1.14     —13.28     —3.65        .10           .73             .07       —3.52       —.07        —.25     —2.85
                (0.87)    (9.70)    (11.98)    (0.07)        (3.48)          (0.04)       (3.72)     (0.01)     (0.13)     (3.64)
WHAT b/
     —           —.94     —9.51     —2.52        .03            .46             .32      —3.49       —.19        —.27     —1.72
                (0.75)    (6.35)     (7.29)    (0.01)        (1.73)          (1.01)       (4.66)     (0.13)     (0.18)     (1.70)


—a/ F statistics are in parentheses. The critical F values at the five percent level of significance are
    2.69 for a one-tailed test and 3.84 for a two—tailed test.
b/ Based on a regression that includes WISC as an explanatory variable.


                                                                                                                                    t'J
                                                                                                                                    03
                                                                                                                                    '.0
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                       291


less than 20 years old at birth are about two points less
than those of children whose mothers were between the ages of
20 and 35 at birth. Similarly, the coefficient of HMAG35 im-
plies that IQ scores of children whose mothers were over the
age of 35 at birth are about 1.5 points higher than those of
children whose mothers were between the ages of 20 and 35 at
birth. The last result and the failure to uncover a negative
IQ differential for children whose mothers were at least 40
years old at birth are somewhat puzzling. One possible ex-
planation is that women who give birth later in life spend
more time with their children. A second possibility is that
the health risks associated with birth at later ages (docu-
mented by Birch and Gussow, 1970) are already accounted for
by variables such as low birth weight. The coefficients in
table 3 reveal that the effects of mother's age at birth in
the low income sample are similar to those in the combined
sample. On the other hand, in the high income sample, no
significant effects are observed. We offer no explanation of
these results, except to note that the prevalence of births
to young mothers is twice as high in the low income sample as
in the high income sample (9.70 percent versus 4.10 percent).

       Broman and others (1975) report a non—linear relation—
ship between IQ and mother's age in the U.S. Collaborative
Perinatal Project. Their finding that those children whose
mothers were relatively young have lower 10 scores is con-
sistent with ours. The same comment applies to their find-
ing that children of older women do not exhibit impaired
intellectual development.
       Parental assessment of infant health status.——The
parents' assessment of the overall health status of their
children at age one year (FYPH) does not have a significant
telationship with either the IQ or achievement measure. This
statement holds, with one exception, for estimates computed
both with and without income interactions. We offer two ex-
planations for the lack of significant effects of this
variable. First, since FYPH reports the response to a rather
general question concerning past health status (as opposed to
MBFED, which refers to a very specific past event, or
PFHEALTH and PFGHEALTH, which refer to current health status),
it is plausible that it contains a relatively large amount of
measurement error. Second, FYPH may reflect aspects of infant
health status that are more accurately measured by the other
past health measures.


Current Health Effects

       Height and weight.--The continuous current height
variable (IHEIGHT) has positive and statistically significant
coefficients in the three cognitive development regressions
in table 2. Children who are one standard deviation above
average in height for their age score more than one point
292                                  HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


higher on average on 10 and achievement tests. On the other
hand, there is essentially no relationship between the con-
tinuous current weight variable (IWEIGHT) and cognitive de-
velopment. This is not an altogether surprising result;
height is a better summary measure of the lifetime nutritional
status of the child, while weight primarily conveys informa-
tion about his current nutritional status.
       Even though height (adjusted far age) is a standard
measure of nutritional status, it has been argued that the
effect of height on IQ does not reflect nutritional effects
at all but rather unmeasured genetic factors that simul-
taneously affect both height and IQ. Evidence concerning the
validity of this argument can be gleaned from the separate
estimates by income class. If the relationship between
height and 10 was due primarily to unmeasured genetic effects,
there would be no reason to observe differences in the
strength of the relationship between income classes.* On the
other hand, if height does reflect nutritional status, and if
high income children as a group were better able to achieve
their genetic potential because they were better nourished on
average, vartations in height would be associated with larger
10 effects in the low income sample than in the high income
sample. This is exactly what we do find (see table 3) . The
height coefficients in the low income sample are more than
twice as large as those in the high income sample.

        These differences in the height coefficients by income
class can also be used to provide a rough estimate of the
"pure" effect of height on JO due to nutrition. If all of the
variation in height in the high income sample was caused by
genetic factors (some of which simultaneously affect both
height and IQ) , while variation in height in the low income
sample was caused by both genetic and nutritional variations,
the difference in the height coefficients in the two samples
would provide an estimate of the pure height effect due to
nutrition. Under these assumptions, comparison of the coef-
ficients in the samples of both high and low income suggest
that, in the low income sample, the nutrition effect accounts
for two—thirds of the value of the coefficient of height. An
alternative rough estimate of the relative nutritional (or
non—genetic) effect in the case of achievement is obtained
by comparing the relationships between height and WRAT in the
regressions where WISC is and is not held constant. If the
unmeasured genetic factors common to height and achievement
are held constant by including WISC in the regression, the
ratio of the height coefficients in the alternative WRAT


*     It is also possible to obtain a lower coefficient of
      height in the high income samples simply because the un-
      measured genetic factors have a diminishing effect as IQ
      rises (average IQ as measured by WISC is higher in the high
      income sample than in the low income sample)
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                          293


equations will indicate what proportion of the height effect
on WRAT is accounted for by variations in nutrition. The
ratio of these two coefficients equals three—fifths. The
agreement between alternative estimates of the relative con-
tribution of nutrition is striking.

       Another interpretation of the height—IQ relationship
is givenby Tanner (1966), who claims that their positive
correlation results partially from common individual patterns
of both physical growth and the development of mental ability.
He argues that the relationship between height and IQ would
attenuate if adults were observed rather than children. While
our data do not allow us to determine to what extent our re-
sults are caused by individual differences in patterns of de-
velopment, Douglas, Ross, and Simpson (1965) analyze the re-
lationship between cognitive development and height for 15—
year-olds, holding constant stage of puberty as well as social
class and family size, and still report strong positive
associations.

       A number of studies have examined relationships among
height, weight, and intellectual development in both developed
and developing countries.* Most of these studies have em-
ployed continuous height and weight measures. We review the
findings for developed countries. Miller (1974) reports a
positive relationship between IQ and achievement scores at
age 11 and height at age five in Newcastle Upon Tyne, England.
Douglas, Ross, and Simpson (1965) find positive relationships
between height and cognitive development not only for British
l5—year—olds, but also for seven and ll—year—olds. Broman,
Nichols, and Kennedy (1975) do not uncover significant re-
lationships between concurrent hTght and IQ measures in the
U.S. Collaborative Perinatal Project. Yet their findings
are not inconsistent with ours because they control for head
circumference, which is highly correlated with height. They
do uncover positive and significant relationships between IQ
at four years of age and weight at one year of age for whites,
and between IQ at four years and weight at four months
and at four years of age for blacks.

       In addition to our work with continuous height and
weight measures, we estimate our basic equations replacing
these variables with discrete indexes that identify very
tall, very short, very heavy, and very thin children. A
somewhat different pattern of relationships among height,
weight, IQ, and school achievement emerges (see table 4) .   In
particular, very thin children have very low WISC and WRAT


*   A number of major studies have been carried out in the
    developing countries. These include the research of
    Selowsky and Taylor (1973), Richardson (1976), Popkin and
    Lim—Ybanez (1977) , and Klein and others (1972)
294                                       HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Table 4. Coefficients of Dummy Variables for Current Height
          Current Weight in WISC or WHAT Regressions. a/



Dependent variable              Tall     Short     Fat       Thin


Combined

WISC                              .67    —2.19      —.23    —12.55
                                (0.20)    (1.65)   (0.05)    (6.04)

WHAT                             2.59    —2.04      —.52    —15.25
                                (3.46)    (1.61)   (0.30)   (10.01)

WHAT b/
     —                           2.30    —1.07      —.42     —9.68
                                (3.48)    (0.57)   (0.25)    (5.17)

Family    income   <   $7,000
WISC                             1.53    —2.44     —1.29    —13.16
                                (0.42)    (1.43)   (0.91)    (5.44)

WHAT                             1.07     —2.24     —.35    —14.32
                                (0.23)    (1.37)   (0.07)    (7.23)

WHAT —
     b/                           .39     —1.16      .22     —8.48
                                (0.04)    (0.47)   (0.03)    (3.25)

Family income          $7,000

WISC                             —.001     —.72      .96    —15.09
                                (0.00)    (0.05)   (0.47)    (1.48)

WHAT                             3.78     —1.51     —.40    —23.70
                                (4.41)    (0.26)   (0.09)    (4.10)

WHAT —
     b/                          3.79     —1.19     —.83    —17.01
                                (5.67)    (0.20)   (0.50)    (2.71)


a/ F statistics in parentheses. The critical F values at the
    five percent level of significance are 2.69 on a one—
    tailed test and 3.84 on a two-tailed test.
b/ Based on a regression that includes WISC as an independent
       variable.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                       295


scores. Although the height coefficients are not always
statistically significant, taller children have above average
scores, while shorter children have below average scores. In
interpreting these results, the reader is cautioned that the
prevalence of thin children is extremely small (.17). We
leave the question of whether height and weight relationships
are discrete, continuous, or a mixture of the two as an issue
for future research.

       Number of decayed primary and permanent teeth.——We
find that the number of decayed primary and permanent teeth,
adjusted for age and sex (IDECAY), has negative significant
effects on cognitive development, except when WRAT is the
dependent variable and WISC is held constant. There are
several alternative ways to interpret this finding. Some
part of the relationship may result from reverse causality;
that is, more intelligent children may be more compliant
with a program of preventive dental care. Some part of the
relationship may reflect unmeasured variations in the family's
interest (preferences) in caring for both the physical health
and mental development of the child. Finally, the estimated
coefficients may reflect the effects of nutrition.

       Differences in the coefficients of IDECAY by income
class (see table 3) provide some evidence that nutrition is
indeed an important explanatory factor. If IDECAY reflects
solely the effects of reverse causality and preferences,
there would be no reason for its coefficients to vary by in-
come class. However, if IDECAY also reflects nutritional
status, and if a larger proportion of the variation in IDECAY
in the low income sample (as compared to the high income
sample) results from variation in nutrition, the coefficient
of IDECAY would be larger in the low income sample. Both for
WISC and WHAT, the coefficients of IDECAY indicate a larger
negative effect in the low income sample, suggesting that
nutrition is at work.

       Abnormal hearing.——All three regression coefficients
of abnormal hearing (IHEAR) are negative in table 2, and are
statistically significant when WHAT is the dependent variable.
The importance of poor hearing in the determination of school
achievement is revealed by the following comparison. When
all other variables, including WISC, are held constant,
children with poor hearing have a WHAT score that is approxi-
mately 7.5 points lower than children with normal hearing.
This difference exceeds the seven—point difference in the
mean WHAT score in the high income sample as compared to the
low income sample. As shown in table 3, the preceding com-
parison is even more dramatic when the effect of poor hear-
ing is allowed to interact with family income. Based on the
last line in this table, in the high income sample, children
with poor hearing have a WHAT score that is approximately
9.5 points lower than children with normal hearing. One
explanation for the relatively strong relationship between
296                                  HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


poor hearing and WHAT in the high incone sample is that high
income children attend schools of higher average quality and
that poor hearing and school quality interact in their effects
on IQ and achievement. Clearly, this explanation is specula-
tive. It could be tested, however, by means of a controlled
experiment in which attempts were made to improve hearing
levels of children in different school environments, and the
subsequent trends in cognitive development compared.
       Hu (1973) finds an insignificant, positive effect of
hearing correction on 10 in a sample of children from low
income families in Pennsylvania (see table 3) . Our results
are not directly comparable with his because children with
abnormal hearing who have had their hearing corrected cannot
be identified in the health examination survey (HES) .
Further, Hu's analysis suffers from the difficulty that
his coding scheme gives children with a corrected defect
a higher score than children with no defect.

       Binocular distance vision.——The set of three dummy
variables denoting whether or not the child has normal vision
and whether or not he wears glasses are, in general, not
statistically significant. This is true both for the full
sample and for the two income classes. The one exception is
the variable NSEEG in the WISC equation. That is, children
with normal vision who wear glasses have WISC scores almost
three points lower, on average, than children with abnormal
vision who do not wear glasses. This effect persists in each
income class, although it is no longer statistically signifi-
cant. A possible explanation for this puzzling result is
that NSEEG might partially measure the quality of medical
care received by children; that is, children who receive
prescriptions for glasses when their eyesight is normal may
be receiving the lowest quality care among all children in
the sample.
       It might seem surprising that children with abnormal
uncorrected distance vision who wear glasses do not have
higher IQ and achievement scores than children with abnormal
uncorrected distance vision who do not wear glasses (see
the coefficients of SEEG). One explanation of this result
is that the effects of poor vision on school learning might
not manifest themselves until ages beyond the age range in
Cycle II of the HES. A related point is that the prev-
alence of abnormal uncorrected binocular distance vision
is higher at ages 12 through 17, for example, than at
ages six through 11 (NCHS, 1973b). Finally, poor medi-
cal care for vision problems has been documented by


*     In particular, children who wore hearing aids were ex-
      amined without them. To the extent that these aids are
      beneficial, we understate the impact of abnormal un-
      corrected hearing on 10 and school achievement.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                           297


Kessner (1974) , who finds that 40 percent of children in a
low income sample who were tested with their glasses failed a
visual acuity test.

       In contrast to our findings, Hu (1973) uncovers a pos-
itive and significant relationship between IQ and vision cor-
rection, though his study is marred by a coding scheme that
gives children with corrected vision a higher score than
children with no defect. Douglas, Ross, and Simpson's (1967)
findings are more similar to our own. They report that in
the British National Survey of Health and Development, children
with abnormal distance vision have higher IQ and achievement
scores than children with normal vision. They argue that
this is because nearsighted children are more interested in
intellectual activities and less interested in physical activ-
ities than their peers with normal vision. As shown by the
difference between the coefficient of SEEG and the coefficient
of NRMAL, a similar tendency is present in the Health
Examination Survey. *

       Significant abnormalities.——The presence of significant
abnormalities (ABN) has large negative and significant effects
on both IQ and achievement (except when WISC is held constant
in the WRAT equation). Children with such abnormalities have
10 scores on average nine points lower than children without
abnormalities. Examination of the coefficients by income
class indicates that the effects are about the same in both
income classes.

       Excessive school absence due to illness.——The coef-
ficients of the dichotomous variable for excessive school ab-
sence due to illness in the past six months (SCHABS) are neg-
ative, but not statistically significant, in table 2. The
estimates by income class (table 3), however, do reveal that
excessive absence for health reasons is damaging to the IQ
and achievement of children from high income families but not
to children from low income families. It is possible to at-
tribute this result, as in the case of poor hearing, to the
effects of higher average school quality in the high income
sample.
       Douglas and Ross (1965) also examine the effects of
school absenteeism. They report a negative association be-
tween achievement and the incidence of school absence due to
illness except for children from upper middle class families.
We have no explanation of the difference between our results
and theirs.



*   This result might also reflect reverse causality from IQ
    and achievement to poor vision due to excessive use of
    the eyes.
298                                HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


       Parental assessment of children's current health
status.--Parents' assessment of their child's current health
as poor or fair as compared to good or very good (measured by
the variable PFHEALTH) is associated with significantly lower
achievement scores. These scores are from two to three points
lower for children whose current health is assessed as poor or
fair. In contrast, no significant effects are reported for
10. The above results hold for the separate income classes,
as well as for the full sample. The finding that current
health assessment has an effect on achievement and not on IQ
makes sense because the latter is not likely to respond to
the transitory variations in health represented by the
parents' current assessment (remember that these estimates
hold constant variables that represent many aspects of the
child's permanent health status).
       Accidents.—-The dichotomous variable indicating
whether or not the child has had one or more accidents since
infancy has very small negative coefficients, not
significantly different from zero in all cases. The aspects
of health that are independently reflected by this variable
do not appear to interact with 10 and school achievement.


Income and Race Oifferences
in IQ and Achievement

       To assess the overall impact of health on IQ and
achievement, a measure summarizing the combined effects of all
health variables is needed. Such a measure cannot be
constructed for an abstract case. Rather, two specific cases
are examined: differences between children from high and low
income families and between children from black and white
families. More precisely, we use the coefficients in table 2
and Appendix table A-3 to calculate what proportion of low
income-high income and black-white differences in WISC and
WHAT can be accounted for by differences in the average health
characteristics of these groups.

       The resulting computations are summarized in tables 5
and 6. Table S shows how many of the gross differences in
WISC and WHAT between the two income classes disappear if the
low income class is given the income distribution, the mean
parents' schooling, mean family size, and mean health levels
of the high income sample, and if the relationship between
WISC (or WHAT) and the explanatory variables was the same in
both income classes. Similarly, table 6 shows how the gross
black-white differentials in WISC and WHAT scores change if
blacks are given the white values of the socioeconomic and
health variables and if the effects of these variables on
WISC and WHAT are the same for blacks and whites. The family
income calculations are based on the six income dummy var-
iables defined in Appendix table A-l. The parents' school-
ing calculations are based on the separate effects of
300                                  HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Table 6. Children's Health, Parents' Schooling, and Family
          Income Components of Difference in WISC between
          White and Black Children. a/


                                               Percentage b/
                                                of gross
Component                     Absolute         difference


WISC (gross difference = 14.778)

Children's health                  .179           1.21
Family size                     .501              3.39
Family income                  1.548             10.48
Parents' schooling             2.990             20.23

WRAT (gross difference = 10.910)

Children's health                  .132           1.21
Family size                        .470           4.31
Family income                  1.392             12.76
Parents' schooling             2.642             24.22

WRAT (with WISC)
                                                          -
Children's health                  .054             .50
Family size                        .249           2.28
Family income                      .708            6.49
Parents' schooling             1.316              12.06
WISC                           4.833              44.30


a/ Computations are based on a regression that uses the
    continuous current height and weight variables and
    does not allow for interaction effects between family
    income and children's health.
b/ These percentages will not, in general, add up to 100
    for two reasons. First, the calculations do not in-
    corporate the effects of the entire set of explanatory
    variables (indeed, these percentages could sum to more
    than 100 if the variables excluded from the calcula-
    tions made a negative contribution to the difference
    in WISC or WRAT). Second, even if all variables in
    the regression equation were used, there is still
    random variation in WISC and WHAT that our equations
    cannot explain or predict.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                          301


mother's schooling and father's schooling. These are crude
estimates to the extent that variations in parents' education
and income and family size lead to variations in health
levels, the full effects of parents' education, income, and
family size will be larger than those given in the tables.
       From table 5, it is clear that almost all of the dif-
ferences in WISC and WRAT between the high and low income
subsamples can be accounted for by differences in the socio-
economic and health variables included in the calculations.
Moreover, it is noteworthy that about 10 percent of the gross
difference is related to health factors alone. These results
are to be contrasted with the case of black-white differ-
entials.* In the latter case, a much smaller percentage of
the gross difference in WISC or WRAT is accounted for by the
variables in our table, and only about one percent of the dif-
ference can be attributed to the set of health variables.
Thus, health differences as measured in this study do not ap-
pear to provide an important explanation for racial differ-
ences in IQ and achievement. Clearly, a complete explanation
of the black children's 15 point deficit in IQ and 11 point
deficit in school achievement would constitute an extremely
important accomplishment for both social science and public
policy.
       In conclusion, we view the estimates in tables 5 and 6
as little more than one way to summarize regression results.
These estimates convey three tentative results:   (1) dif-
ferences in IQ and achievement between children in high and
low income classes are due in part to differences in health,
(2) the health component of the IQ or achievement difference
is much less important than either the family income com-
ponent or the parents' schooling component, and (3) black—
white differences in IQ and achievement scores are much
harder to explain than are income differences, with black—
white health differences playing a minimal role.


IV. SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS
       Does poor health, as measured by the indicators we have
employed, contribute to retarding the cognitive development
of children? Based on a representative sample of white chil-
dren in the United States, our tentative answer is that it
does. With family background and home environment variables
held constant, many of the health measures that we have used
in this paper have significant effects on IQ and school
achievement. In addition, either taken as a single set or in
two separate subsets (the health variables measured in infancy

*   The black sample, like the white sample, includes only
    children who live with both of their natural (or
    adoptive) parents.
302                                HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?

and those measured currently) , the health variables make a
statistically significant contribution to the explanation of
variations in school achievement, - even whenT IQ is held
constant.

       With regard to the effects of specific health indica-
tors, birth weight, breast—feeding, nutritional status (as
reflected by height and by the number of decayed permanent
and primary teeth), and poor hearing stand out as important
correlates of IQ and achievement. Low birth weight is as
damaging to children from high income families as to children
from low income families. Nutritional status effects are
more important in the low income sample, while poor hearing
and excessive school absence due to illness are more important
                                           -
in the high income sample.

       Our results are useful whether or not the mechanism by
which a given health variable alters cognitive development is
fully understood. In the case where the mechanism is known,
our results can be used to identify the appropriate kinds of
government intervention. A case in point is the role of poor
hearing in the determination Of school achievement. Here we
feel confident that the basic force at work is a causal re-
lationship running from hearing problems to school learning.
Alternatively, when effects of certain variables are large,
but mechanisms are not well-understood, our findings suggest
the nature of additional research that is required to formu-
late public policy, rather than the appropriate policies per
se. Consider, for example, our result that current height
is an important determinant of cognitive development in chil-
dren from low income families. This result has a very def-
inite policy implication if the mechanism at work is a posi-
tive correlation between height and nutritional status. The
policy implication is much less clearcut if the mechanism at
work is a common genetic inheritance of height and mental
                                                   -
ability.
       We view the empirical work in this paper as prelimi-
nary or ongoing rather than definitive or final. Due to the
preliminary nature of the work, we have not hesitated to sug-
gest alternative explanations of certain findings, to specu-
late and to be provocative in discussion results, and to pro-
pose a partial agenda for future research. Instead of repeat-
ing the items on this agenda that were mentioned in section
III, we conclude the paper by suggesting two new ones. The
first is an investigation of health and cognitive development
relationships at later stages in the child's life cycle. In
particular, one could determine if some of the strong re-
lationships between indicators of early- health and IQ and
achievement taper off as the child grows. The second is a
longitudinal study of the change in cognitive development for
the same child between two different ages as it relates to
initial levels of health or to changes in health. The latter
study would be particularly useful because of evidence
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                       303


summarized by Bloom (1964) that the rate of growth of cogni-
tive development is more responsive to environmental factors
than to the initial level of cognitive development.



Acknowledgments.
Research for this paper was supported by grants from the
Ford Foundation and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank
Sol Chafkin, Dov Chernichovsky, Douglas Coate, Thomas Cooney,
Victor Fuchs, Ruth Gross, M.D., Teh-Wei Hu, Herbert Klarman,
Robert Michael, Barry Popkin, and Donald Yett for helpful
comments and suggestions; and Ann Colle and Jacob Gesthalter
for research assistance. This paper has not undergone the
review accorded official NBER publications; in particular, it
has not yet been submitted for approval by the Board of
Directors.
304                                   HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Table A-i. Definition of Basic Variables in WISC or WHAT
            Regressions.


Variable name                    Definition

TWIN            Dummy variable that equals one if child is a twin
FIRST           Dummy variable that equals one if child is the
                first born in the family
KIND        Dummy variable that equals one if child attended
            kindergarten or nursery school
MWORKPT     Dummy variables that equal one if the mother
MWORKFT     works part-time or full—time, respectively
MALE            Dummy variable that equals one if child is male
FLANG           Dummy variable that equals one if a foreign
                language is spoken in the home
MEDUCAT     Years of formal schooling completed by mother
FEDUCAT     Years of formal schooling completed by father
  Yl        Dummy variables that equal one if family income
  Y2        is greater than or equal to $3,000 (Yl); greater
  Y3        than or equal to $4,000 (Y2); greater than or
  Y4        equal to $5,000 (Y3); greater than or equal to
  YS        $7,000 (Y4); greater than or equal to $10,000
  Y6        (YS); greater than or equal to $15,000 (Y6)
NEAST       Dummy variables that equal one if child lives in
MWEST       Northeast, Midwest, or South, respectively
SOUTH

URB1        Dummy variables that equal one if child lives in
UHB2        an urban area with a population of three million
URB3        or more (URB1); in an urban area with a popula-
NURB        tion between one million and three million (URB
            2); in an urban area with a population less than
            one million (URB3); or in a non—rural and non-
            urbanized area (NURB) ; omitted class is residence
            in a rural area
LESS2O      Number of persons in the household 20 years of
            age of less
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                              305


  Table A-2. Means and Standard Deviations of Dependent and
              Independent Variables, Whites, Ages 6-11, Mother
              and Father Present.   (n = 3599)



                                                     Standard
  Variable                  Mean                     deviation


  WISC                    103.1937                    13.9535
  WRAT                    103.1773                    12.8378
  LIGHT1                     .0128                      .1123
  LIGHT2                     .0411                      .1986
  BFED                       .3037                      .4599
  LMAG                       .0697                      .2547
  HMAG35                     .1042                      .3056
  HMAG4O                     .0308                      .1729
  FYPH                       .0839                      .2773
  LESS2O                    3.6163                     1.6371
  SEEG                       .0709                       .2566
  NSEEG                      .0431                      .2030
  NRMAL                      .8377                      .3687
  IHEAR                      .0058                      .0762
  ABN                        .0806                      .2722
  IHEIGHT                    .0371                      .9673
  IWEIGHT                    .0596                      .9982
  IDECAY                    —.0674                      .9643
  PFHEALTH                   .0417                      .1999
  PFGHEALTH                  .4451                      .4970
  ACC                        .1678                      .3738
  SCHABS                     .0428                      .2024
  TALL                       .0206                      .1419
  SHORT                      .0153                      .1227
  FAT                        .0464                      .2104
  THIN                       .0017                      .0408
  TWIN                       .0233                      .1510
  FIRST                      .2895                      .4536
  KIND                       .7313                      .4433
  MWORKPT                    .1373                      .3422
  MWORKFT                    .1373                      .3422
  MALE                       .5115                      .4999
  FLANG                      .1020                      .3027
  MEDUCAT                  11.2431                     2.7456
  FEDUCAT                  11.2698                     3.4444
    Yl                       .9011                      .2986
    Y2                       .8361                      .3703
    Y3                       .7497                      .4333
    Y4                       .4793                      .4996
    Y5                       .2212                      .4151
   Y6                        .0614                      .2401
 NEAST                       .2390                      .4265
 MWEST                       .3279                      .4695
 SOUTH                       .1759                      .3808
 URB1                        .1976                      .3982
 URB2                        .1256                      .3314
 URB3                        .1814                      .3854
 NURB                        .1500                      .3572
306                                                      HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?




  Table A-3. Ordinary Least Squares Reqressj.ues of RISC and NSA?. a!



                            RISC                      WRAT                   NRA?
                          Regression                Regression            Regression
  Independent variable    coefficient    F      -
                                                    coefficient    F      coefficient     F


  TWIN                       —3.04      4.92           —1.08      0.70         .26        0.05
  MWORKFT                    —1.92      10.26          —1.25      4.91        —.41        0.66
  MMORKFT -                    .59      0.99             .38      0.46        .12         0.06
  MEOUCAT                      .92      77.82            .72      54.08       .32       13.07
  FEOUCAT                      .63      52.95            .60      54.17       .32       19.76
  MALE                        3.05      57.96          —2.69      50.74      —4.03      143.61
  FLANG                      —3.73      6.08             .53      0.64       1.29        4.86
  FIRST                       —.01      0.00             .66      2.02        .67        2.61
  51040                       1.03      3.51            —.31       0.35      —.76        2.75
   11                         1.62      2.53           —1.83       3.64      —2.55       9.00
   12                          .66       0.40           3.04       9.53       2.76       9.90
   13                         1.08       1.92           1.86      6.34        1.38       4.47
   14                          .72       1.66            .09       0.03       —   .23    0.23
   15                         1.75       7.28            .78       1.64           .01    0.00
   16                          .65       0.52           —.56       0.39       —.87       1.19
  150020                      —.55      18.76           —.56      18.68       —.30        6.72
  FYFH                        —.37       0.24           —.25       0.17       —.13        0.04
  LMAG                       —1.87       4.98           —.82       1.08           .00     0.00
  HMAG35                      1.68       4.75            .48       0.43       —.27        0.17
  HMAG4O                      —.56       0.17           —.30       0.05       —.05        0.00
  sF00                        1.84      16.57           1.50      12.54           .70     3.42
  100511                     —5.17       8.03          —9.33      29.40      —7.05       21.44
  110512                     —2.46       5.73          —1.96       4.09       —.88        1.04
  5050                        1.00       0.74            .40       0.13       —.04        0.00
  55550                      —2.86       4.70          —1.66       1.78       —.40        0.13
  NRMAL       -              —.93        0.99          —1.33       2.29       —.92        1.40
  15555                      —3.65       1.93          —9.20      13.84      —7.60       12.06
  RON                        —2.31       9.74          —3.46      24.44      —2.44       15.49
  15851CR?                    —.22       0.63           —.11       0.18       —.01        0.00
  1551051                     1.23      17.81           1.32      23.22           .78    10.31
  IOECAY                      —.79      12.16          —.40        3.47      —.05         0.07
  FFREALTR                   —1.13       1.12          —2.68       7.06      —2.18        5.98
  FFGHEALTR                    .06       0.02           —.34       0.70      —.37         1.06
  ACC                         —.22       0.17           —.27       0.29       —.18        0.15
  RCHABS                      —.09       0.01           —.70       0.56       —.06        0.63
  MISC                                                                            .44   993.82
  CONSTANT                   85.06                     89.71                 52.21
  Adj.R2                       .27                       .25                      .40
      F                      33.37                     27.67                 57.68
      n                      35.99                     35.99                 35.99


  ! Regressinss isclude three region and four residence variables. The critical
      F values at the five percent level nO significance arc 2.69 on a one—tailed
      test and 3.84 on a-two—tailed lest.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                          307


REFERENCES


Acosta, Phyllis B.
     1974    'Nutritional status of Mexican American preschool
             children in a border town." American Journal of
             Clinical Nutrition 27 (December).

Becker, Gary S.
     1965     "A theory of the allocation of time." Economic
             Journal 75 (September) :299.

Becker, Gary S. and H. Gregg Lewis
     1973    'On the interaction between the quantity and
             quality of children." In Schultz, T. W. (ed.),
             New Economic Approaches to Fertility. Proceed-
             ings of a conference sponsored by the National
             Bureau of Economic Research and the Population
             Council. Journal of Political Economy 81
             (March/April) :2, part II.

Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes
     1976    "Child endowments and the quantity and quality
             of children." Journal of Political Economy 84
             (August):4, part II.
Berg, Robert L.
     1973    Health Status Indexes. Proceedings of a con-
              ference conducted by Health Services Research,
             Tucson, Arizona, October 1972. Chicago: Hos-
             pital Research and Educational Trust.

Birch, Herbert G. and Joan Dye Gussow
     1970    Disadvantaged Children: Health, Nutrition, and
             School Failure. (p. 10). New York: Harcourt,
             Brace, and World, Inc.

Bloom, Benjamin S.
     1964    Stability and Change in Human Characteristics.
             New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Brody, Jane E.
     1977     "Personal health: Breast—feeding may help an
              infantto  a better life." The New York Times
              (March 9)

Broman, Sarah H., Paul L. Nichols, and Wallace A. Kennedy
    1975    Preschool IQ: Prenatal and Early Developmental
             Correlates.   Hilisdale, N.J.: Lawrence Eribaum
             Associates.
308                                HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Center for Disease Control
     1972    Ten-State Nutrition Survey in the United States,
             1968-1970.   I — Historical Development; II -
             Demographic Data, U.S.DHEW publication no. (ESM)
             72-8130; III - Clinical, Anthropometry, Dental,
             U.S.DHEW publication no. (HSM) 72-8131; IV -
             Biochemical, U.S.DHEW publication no. (HSM) 72—
             8132; V - Dietary, U.S.DHEW publication no.
              (HSM) 72—8133; Highlights, U.S.DHEW publication
             no. (HSM) 72—8134. Atlanta, Ga.: Health Serv-
             ices and Mental Health Association.

Chernichovsky, Dov and Douglas Coate
     1977     The choice of diet for young children and its
             relation to children's growth." Unpublished
             paper.

Christakis, George
     1968    "Nutritional epidemiologic investigation of 642
             New York City children." 2\merican Journal of
             Clinical Nutrition 21 (January)

Cooney, Jr., Thomas E.
     1977    "Health and nutrition as possible factors in
             juvenile anti—social behavior." Prepared for
             the Ford Foundation.

Correa, H.
     1975    "Measured influence of nutrition on socioeconomic
             development." World Review of Nutrition and
             Dietetics 20.

Davie, Ronald, Neville Butler, and Harvey Goldstein
      1972   From Birth to Seven. New York: Humanities
             Press, Inc.

Douglas, J.W.B. and J. M. Ross
     1965    "The effects of absence on primary school per-
             formance." British Journal of Educational
             Psychology 35, part I.
Douglas, J.W.B., J. M. Ross, and H. R. SImpson
     1967    "The ability and attainment of short-sighted
             pupils." Journal of the Royal Statistical
             Society 130, part 4.
      1965   "The relation between height and measured edu-
             cational ability in school children of the same
             social class, family size, and stage of sexual
             development." Human Biology 37:2.
Drillien, Cecil M.
     1964    The Growth and Development of the Prematurely
             Born Infant. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                          309


Driskel, Judy A. and Claudia S. Price
     1974    "Nutritional status of preschoolers from low—
             income Alabama families." Journal of American
             Dietetic Association 65 (September)

Edwards, Linda Nasif
     1975    "The economics of schooling decisions: Teenage
             enrollment rates." The Journal of Human
             Resources 10 (Spring) :2.

Edwards, Linda Nasif and Michael Grossman
     1977    "An economic analysis of children's health and
             intellectual development." National Bureau of
             Economic Research Working Paper no. 180 (May).

Endozien, J. C., B. R. Switzer, and R. B. Bryan
     1976    Medical Evaluation of the Special Supplemental
             Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children
             (WIC) : Summary and Conclusions. Department of
             Nutrition, School of Public Health, University of
             North Carolina (July)

Grossman, Michael
     1975    "The correlation between health and schooling."
              n Terleckyj, Nestor E. (ed.), Household
             duction and Consumption. New York: Columbia
             University Press for the National Bureau of
             Economic Research.

     1972     The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and
              cal Investigation. New York: Columbia Univer-
              sity Press for the National Bureau of Economic
              Research.

Haggerty, Robert J., Klaus J. Roghmann, and Ivan B. Pless
     1975    Child Health and the Community. New York:
             John Wiley and Sons.

Heller, Peter S. and William D. Drake
     1976    Malnutrition, Child Morbidity, and the Family
             Decision Process. Discussion Paper no. 58.
             Center for Research on Economic Development,
             The University of Michigan (September).
Mu, Teh-Wei
     1973     "Effectiveness of child health and welfare
              programs: A simultaneous equations approach."
              Socio—Economic Planning Sciences 7.

Illsley, Raymond
     1966    "Preventive medicine in the perinatal period."
             Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine
             59 (March).
310                                HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Inman, Robert P.
     1976     "The family provision of children's health: An
             economic analysis." In Rosett, Richard (ed.)
             The Role of Health Insurance in the Health
             Services Sector. New York: Columbia University
             Press for the National Bureau of Economic
             Research.

Kaplan, Robert S., Lester B. Lave, and Samuel Leinhardt
     1972    'The efficacy of a comprehensive health care
             project: An empirical analysis.' American
             Journal of Public Health 62 (July) :7.

Kessner, David M.
     1974    Assessment of Medical Care for Children:
             Contrasts in Health Status, vol. 3. Washington,
             D.C.: Institute of Medicine.
Klein, Robert E.
     1972     "Is big smart? The relation of growth to
             cognition." Journal of Health and Social
             Behavior 13 (September).

Lancaster, Kelvin J.
     1966    "A new approach to consumer theory." Journal of
             Political Economy 74 (April) :2.

Leibowitz, Arleen
     1974    "Home investment in children." In Schultz, T.W.
             (ed.) , Economics of the Family. New York:
             Columbia University Press for the National
             Bureau of Economic Research.

Leveson, Irving, Doris Ullman, and Gregory Wassall
     1969    "Effects of health on education and productiv-
             ity." Inquiry 5 (December) :4.

Lewin, Roger
     1975    "Starved brains." Psychology Today 9 (Septem-
             ber) :4.

Mata, Leonardo
     1978    "Breast feeding: Main promoter of infant
             health." American Journal of Clinical
             Nutrition 31 (May).

Mechanic, David
     1964    "The influence of mothers on their children's
             health, attitudes, and behavior." Pediatrics
             33 (March).
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                         311


Michael, Robert T.
     1972    The Effect of Education on Efficiency in
              sumption. New York: Columbia University Press
              for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Miller, F. J.
     1974     The School Years in Newcastle Upon Tyne 1952—
              62: Being a Further Contribution to the Study
              of a Thousand Families. New York: Oxford
              University Press.
ldushkin, Selma J.
     1977     "Knowledge and choices in health policy." Paper
              prepared for delivery at National Health Forum
              (March 23).

Muth, Richard F.
     1966    "Household production and consumer demand
             functions." Econometrica 34 (July):3.
National Center for Health Statistics
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
     1975    Eye Examination Findings Among Youths Aged
             12-17 Years: United States. Public Health
             Service publication no. 1000, series 11,
             no. 155.

     1973     Body Weight, Stature, and Sitting Height:
              White and Negro Youths 12-17 Years,
              United States. Vital and Health Statistics,
              series 11, no. 126.

     1972a    Binocular Visual Acuity of Children:
              Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics —
              United States. Vital and Health Statistics,
              series 11, no. 112.

     1972b    Periodontal Disease and Oral Hygiene Among
              Children: United States. Vital and Health
              Statistics, series 11, no. 117.
     l970a    Hearing Levels of Children by Age and Sex:
              United States. Public Health Service
              publication no. 1000, series 11, no. 102.
312                                     HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


National Center for Health Statistics
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
     l970b   Height and Weight of Children: United States.
             Public Health Service publication no. 1000,
             series 11, no. 119.
      l967a   Plan, Operation, and Response Results of a
              gram of Children's Examinations. Public Health
              Service publication no. 1000, series 1, no. 5.
      1967b A Study of the Achievement Test Used in the
              Health Examination Survey of Persons Aged 6-17
              Years. Public Health Service publication no.
              1000, series 2, no. 24.
O'Hara, Donald J.
     1975    "Microeconomic aspects of the demographic
             transition." Journal of Political Economy 83
              (December) :6.

Owen, George M.
     1974     "A study of nutritional status of preschool
             children in the United States, 1968-1970."
             Pediatrics 53 (April) :supplement.

Popkin, Barry M. and Marisol Lim-Ybanez
     1977    "Nutrition and learning: An economic analysis."
             Unpublished paper.
Richardson, Stephen A.
     1976    "The influence of severe malnutrition in infancy
             on the intelligence of children at school age:
             An ecological perspective." In Walsh, Roger N.
             and William T. Greenough (eds.), Environments
             as Therapy for Brain Dysfunction. New York:
             Plenum Publishing Corporation.
Schack, Elisabeth and Barbara Starfield
     1973    "Acute disability in childhood examination of
             agreement between various measures." Medical
             Care 11 (July/August) :4.

Scrimshaw, Nevin S. and John E. Gordon
     1968    Malnutrition, Learning, and Behavior. Cambridge,
             Mass.: The M.I.T. Press.

Selowsky, Marcelo and Lance Taylor
     1973    "The economics of malnourished children: An
             example of disinvestment in human capital."
             Economic Development and Cultural Change 22
              (October) :1.
HEALTH AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT                      313


Seoane, Nicole and Michael C. Latham
     1971    'National anthropometry in the identification of
             malnutrition in childhood." Journal of Tropical
             Pediatric and Environmental Child Health
             (September)
Sims, Laura S. and Portia M. Morris
     1974    'Nutritional status of preschoolers." Journal
             of American Dietetic Association 64 (May)

Starfield, Barbara
     1975    "Health needs of children.' Prepared for the
             Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

Stoch, M. B. and P. M. Smythe
     1976    "15—year developmental study on effects of
             severe undernutrition during infancy on subse-
             quent physical growth and intellectual func-
             tioning." Archives of Disease in Childhood 51.

Sullivan, Daniel F.
     1966     'Conceptual problems in developing an index of
             health." Public Health Service publication no.
             1000. Vital and Health Statistics, series 2,
             no. 17. Rockville, Md.: National Center for
             Health Statistics.

Talbot, Nathan B., Jerome Kagan, and Leon Eisenberg (eds.)
     1971    Behavioral Science in Pediatric Medicine.
             Philadelphia: W. t. Saunders Company.

Tanner, J. M.
     1966     "Galtonian eugenics and the study of growth."
              Eugenics Review 58.

Wallace, Helen M.
     1962    Health Services for Mothers and Children.
             Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Company.

Ware, Jr., John E.
     1976     "The conceptualization and measurement of health
              for policy—relevant research in medical care
             delivery." Presented at the annual meetings of
              the American Association for the Advancement of
              Science, Boston, Massachusetts (February)

Wiener, Gerald
     1965    "Correlates of low birth weight: Psychological
             status at six to seven years of age." Pediatrics
              35 (March) :3, part I.
314                                 HEALTH: WHAT IS IT WORTH?


Willis, Robert
     1973    "A new-approach to the economic theory of
             fertility behavior." In Schultz, T. W. (ed.)
             New Economic Approaches to Fertility. Proceed-
             ings of a conference sponsored by the National
             Bureau of Economic Research and the Population
             Council. Journal of Political Economy 81
             (March/April) :2, part II.
