                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EMPI RICAL STUDI ES OF MACROECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE




                        John F. Helliwell
                           Tim Padmore



                      Working Paper No. 1021




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          November 1982




This paper has been prepared for P.B. Kenen and R.W. Jones, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics (North—Holland, Amsterdam),
forthcoming 1983. In preparing this paper, we have had invaluable
collaboration from the researchers whose work is surveyed. We also
wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #1021
                                              November 1982



      Empirical Studies of Macroeconomic Interdependence


                           ABSTRACT

     In this paper we examine the structure and empirical
results from several groups of linked econometriá models. The
main focus of the paper is on the international transmission of

fiscal policies, monetary policies, and oil price shocks, under
both fixed and flexible exchange rates. The linkage models are
divided into four groups: projects based on available national

models; projects using structural models designed with monetary
and exchange rate linkages in mind; projects focussed mainly on
trade linkages; and projects using very small national models
with common structure. Each group comprises from two to four
projects. Comparable results on the transmission of fiscal
policy under fixed exchange rates are available for eight
projects, while four projects provide evidence on the domestic
and international effects of monetary policy and oil price
shocks.

John F. Helliwell                Tim Padmore
Department of Economics           Department of Economics
University of British Columbia    University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C,                   Vancouver, B.C.
Canada V6T1Y2                     Canada V6T 1Y2

(604) 228—4953
      EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF MACROECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE

                  John F. Helliwell and Tim Padmore


1. Introduction


     In this chapter we present and compare some empirical
results from studies of macroeconomic interdependence. We

concentrate on studies that involve linked macroeconometric
models of two or more countries. This restricts our attention to
about a dozen research projects, and means bypassing studies

based on partial models, general equilibrium trade models, and
single economy models. We have chosen to specialize in this way
so that we can focus in some detail on a few key issues. We have
been fortunate in having the collaboration of many of the

modellers in running and helping to interpret experiments that
expose some of the main channels of international transmission.
Since most of the models are continually changing, our survey

can be only a partial snapshot that is bound to be outdated
soon. This is a discouraging but inevitable feature of surveys
of empirical work. To keep the rate of obsolescence as low as
possible, we limit the amount of detail we present about

specific versions of the models, and concentrate the analysis on

broad questions of continuing importance, with special attention
to the role of exchange rates in international transmission. We

have also attempted, so far as possible, to collect results
relevant to the 1970s and 1980s rather than the 1950s and 1960s.

    In the next section, we classify the main linkage projects,

paying special attention to those features of the models that

have important bearing on the international transmission of
2



disturbances under fixed and flexible exchange rates. In the
three subsequent sections we discuss the international

repercussions of fiscal policy, monetary policy, and changes in

world oil prices. After that, we provide some evaluation of the
empirical results available to us and make some conjectures

about the likely future course of research.



2. An Overview of Linkage Models

     While not complete, our selection of models covers most of

the projects for which model specifications and simulation
results were published during the 1970s and early 1980s. We

limit our attention to linked rnacroeconometric models. (1)     In

this section we outline the main features of the models, with

special attention to those that provided the simulation results

assessed in subsequent sections.
     Table 2.1 divides the models into four groups. The first

group includes Project LINK and the Eurolink Project, (2)      both

of which are based on national models that are regularly used
 for independent forecasting within the national economies. In

the case of Project LINK, however, some of the newer models,
especially those of the Eastern European Comecon countries, have

been built and operated in international agencies, or at the
 Project LINK central office. The national models vary greatly in

 size, in theoretical conception, and especially in their
 treatment of international financial linkages. Project LINK has
 been producing world trade forecasts for more than ten years

 but, until very recently, there has been no mechanism for
 determining international capital flows and exchange rates.
                                                                   3



(3)    In the more recent Eurolink, initial efforts have also
been directed to consistent explanation of bilateral trade

flows, with the modelling of exchange rates and capital flows

being developed subsequently.
      Thus, for the purposes of our survey, the Project LINK and
Eurolink results illuminate trade and price linkages under the
assumptions of fixed exchange rates and full sterilization of

reserve flows. Since Project LINK, among all the linkage models,
contains the most detailed analysis of world trade, it is of
especial use in the analysis of world-level shocks, such as
changes in the world price of crude oil.

      The second group comprises structural models designed with
monetary and exchange-rate linkages in mind, and therefore able
to cast light on the nature of international transmission under

alternative exchange rate systems. Although they all make use of
aggregate quarterly models of substantial scale, the three
projects are nevertheless quite different in scope.

      The Japanese Economic Planning Agency (EPA) world
econometric model is the most comprehensive, as it includes nine

country models and six regional trade models. The U.S. Federal

Reserve Board's Multi—Country Model (MCM) contains five country
models, completed by trading links with the rest of the world.
The national models in both projects were constructed at the

research centres in Tokyo and Washington, respectively. The

Japanese group also made use of foreign country specialists
seconded to Tokyo to assist with particular national models.

      Another notable feature of the EPA project is that it has

provided what appears to be the most methodical comparative test
4




of the various methods for consistent estimation of

international trade flows. (4)      The EPA researchers used

various alternative models to estimate relative price and

activity elasticities of the alternative linkage methods applied
to aggregate real exports of the fifteen EPA countries and
trading regions. Seven methods are compared, and, for six of
them, long-run price elasticities are calculated for each
country and region. Even though the elasticities are long run,
and are based on export prices, rather than on the less closely
linked national output prices, only seven of the 90 estimated
price elasticities are greater than 1.0 in absolute value. The

preferred Hickman-Lau approach gives price elasticities for
export shares of —0.38 for the U.S., —0.63 for Japan, and -0.59
for Germany, the three countries involved in the initial linkage

experiments. Long-term price elasticities for imports of goods

are -0.76 for the U.S., —0.40 for Germany, and —1.18 for Japan.
The lags are such that there are substantial 3—curve effects for

the United States and Germany, but not for Japan. A structural
approach is adopted for the explanation of exchange rates, with

exchange rates determined so as to equilibrate continually the
market for foreign exchange. A combination of official

intervention and exchange—rate--stabilizing private capital flows

provides exchange market stability.
        The U.S.-based MCM model has bilateral trade flows and

endogenous international capital movements. The model explains
bilateral exchange rates between the U.S. and each of the other

    four national currencies. As explained by Hooper et al. (1982),
    early versions of several of the country models showed short—run
                                                                  5



 (and sometimes longer-term) 3—curve effects in response to

exchange rate changes. In conjunction with the directly

estimated capital account equations and the use of the market-
clearing method for determining the exchange rates, -this gave
rise to unstable exchange rate movements in the German and
Japanese models. The MCM researchers found that these problems

could be eliminated by forcing foreign prices and exchange rates
to have symmetrical effects on the domestic economies, and

inverting portfolio capital account equations and estimating
them directly as exchange rate equations. The effect of the
latter change is to make the capital account an automatic buffer
for changes in the current account. In the presence of short-
term 3—curve effects, this is not only necessary for exchange

market stability but is justifiably based on speculative
arbitrage across the 3-curve. The MCM simulation results
analyzed in subsequent sections are based on a revised version
of the model with directly estimated exchange rate equations.

     The third Group II project involves only Canada and the
United States. The two national models were built at about the
same time, but all of the linkage was established from the

Canadian side. The bilateral linkages were embedded in the
Canadian RDX2 model, making use of variables explained by the
U.S. MPS model. Both models were provided with trade linkages to
the rest of the world. In addition, RDX2 contains bilateral

capital account and migration linkages between the two countries
and between Canada and the rest of the world. The endogenous

exchange rate is the bilateral rate between Canada and the

United States, with the exchange rates between the U.S. and the
6



rest of the world treated as exogenous and the triangular
arbitrage condition used to determine the effective exchange

rate between Canada and all third countries.
     Several exchange rate regimes have been used to. link RDX2

and MPS, including rigidly fixed rates, the Bretton Woods

pegged-rate system with behaviorally-estimated official
intervention within the 1% margins, a crawling peg, and a
floating exchange rate without official intervention. Even
though there were 3-curve effects in the current account
linkages between the two models, there were sufficient exchange
rate-stabilizing capital flows to ensure exchange market
stability. As noted earlier in connection with the MCM results,

this result may have to do with the fact that one of the capital

account portfolio equations was renormalized and directly
estimated as an exchange rate equation.
     The projects in the third group all involve sets of country

models with a common structure. They are all linked by trade and
trade-price equations, with exogenous exchange rates and no
monetary or capital account linkages. The OECD INTERLINK model
started as a consistent explanation of trade flows, but has

since been expanded to include domestic activity and price
equations, and plans are underway to develop a more complete

modelling of aggregate supply and to endogenize eventually
capital movements and exchange rates. The COMET, DESMOS, and

METEOR models are all primarily models of the major E.E.C.
countries and the trade linkages between them.
     Most of the group IV models use very small national models,

based on quarterly data, with primary emphasis on monetary and
                                                                  7




exchange rate linkages. The Fair multicountry model contains 64
 separate national models, many more than any other linkage
project. The model of the United States is large, but all of the
other national models contain estimated equations only for

imports, consumption, investment, output, GNP deflator, export
price index, demand for money, long-term interest rate, and
forward exchange rate, and estimated reaction functions for the

short—term interest rate and the exchange rate. As in most of
the linkage models in the first three groups, each national

model determines imports and the price of output, with a trade
share matrix being used to distribute world trade among

competing suppliers, and to determine import prices as functions
of exchange rates and suppliers' export prices. In some of the

reported results (Fair 1981b), the real export shares matrix is
treated as exogenous, while in subsequent work (Fair 1981c,

1982) it is made endogenous by direct estimation of the export
quantity shares as functions of relative export prices. In

subsequent unpublished work, Fair has moved to direct estimation
of export flows from each country to each other country. The

results confirm the relatively low price elasticities found by
the Japanese EPA researchers. Like the Fair model, the Japanese
EPA project uses data for aggregate exports and export prices,

although from a much smaller sample of countries. Fair (1981c,

p. ii) reports elasticities that in only one or two cases are

greater than 1.0 in absolute value, although they are negative
for all but three countries, and significantly different from

zero for more than three-quarters of the 64 countries. For the
seven largest OECD countries, the elasticities of export shares
8



range from —0.231 (for Germany) to -0.333 (for Canada), with an
average value of -0.29 and an average t—ratio of 6.0.
     The elasticities of national imports with respect to import
prices are not constrained to be equal to the elasticities with

respect to output prices, and they are significantly negative
for only 6 of the 64 countries outside the U.S., and for none of

the larger OECD economies (Fair 1981a, p. 20). The import price
elasticities in the Fair model are substantially less than in

any of the linkage models described above, and his combination
of import and export price elasticities, along with the method
for determining of export prices, are such that the Marshall—
Lérner conditions' are not met for most country models even in

the long term. This means that the current account responses to
exchange rate changes are destabilizing even with export shares

endogenous. (Fair 1981c, pp. 18—19, shows this result for
depreciation of the DM and the pound Sterling.) Under these
circumstances, there would be little incentive for exchange—
rate-stabilizing private capital flows. Instead of invoking such

flows, Fair endogenizes the exchange rate by means of exchange-
rate reaction functions for 22 countries; these depend on the

lagged exchange rate and some subset of the following variables:

the DM/$ exchange rate, relative prices, relative interest
rates, demand pressure, and net foreign assets. Given this
officially-set exchange rate, the current account balance is

matched by some combination of private capital movements and
changes in official reserves. The latter combination is never

disentangled, since the private and government sectors are
aggregated in Fair's model, and net foreign assets are defined
                                                                  9



by accumulating current account surpluses.
     The second model in this group is the International

Transmission Model of Darby et al. (1982). The model is applied
to the seven major OECD countries plus the Netherlands. In
scale, the national models are about the size of Fair's non—U.S.

models, with an equation for the price level (based on an

inverted demand-for—money equation), an equation for the
unemployment rate, a policy-reation equation for the money
supply, a real interest rate equation intended to equilibrate

savings and investment, an import demand equation, an export
equation, an import price equation, a net capital outflows
equation, and an exchange—market intervention equation (for use
when the exchange rate is endogenous). Under floating exchange
rates, the import demand equation is renorrnalized (for

estimation as well as simulation) to make the exchange rate the
dependent variable. The renorrnalization has very significant

effects on the parameter estimates, and hence on the properties
of the resulting model.

     The international linkages in the Darby model are not as
completely specified as in the other linkage models described
earlier. There are no consistency checks forcing world exports

to equal world imports, so the sum of the balances of payments
for the eight linked countries is assumed to be passively
financed by the rest of the world. The foreign real income and

price variables are weighted averages of the income and price
variables in the eight modelled countries.

    The final project in this group is the Liverpool—based
multilateral model of Patrick Minford and associates. There are
10



nine country models (the OECD major seven plus Belgium and the
Netherlands) and trade equations for three other trading
regions. The special focus of the model is on the use of forward
simulations to generate expected future values of variables. The

structure and estimation of this model are still at a very

preliminary stage. The only estimated equations reported to date
(in Minford, loannidis, and Marwaha, 1981) are for stock demands

for fixed assets in eight countries, consumption functions for
five countries, portfolio demand—for-money equations for seven
countries, and trade equations for the three trading blocks.
     All of the three models in the fourth group are at a more

experimental stage than the other linkage models, and their

parameter estimates and structure may be too preliminary to
permit useful empirical inferences about the nature of
international transmission. The Fair model is the most complete

and empirically informative of the three, and so it will get

correspondingly more attention in the subsequent sections.




3. Transmission of Fiscal Policy

     What can be learned from a comparison of the various

estimates of the cross-country effects of fiscal policies?
Deardorff and Stern (1979) asked this question when they

reviewed various estimates of cross-country government
expenditure multipliers under fixed exchange rates. They began

by constructing a simple expenditure multiplier for each of

eight major OECD countries using marginal propensities to
consume and to import equal to historical averages. Then they
                                                                 11




 linked these country multipliers, using fixed bilateral trade
 weights to spread each country's imports across supplying
countries. A fiscal shock in country i thus influences country j

according to the size of country i's multiplier, the size of

country i's marginal propensity to import from country j, and
the size of country j's multiplier in response to the induced
change in its exports.

     Deardorff and Stern then computed static "elasticity

multipliers" defined as the percentage change in a country's GNP
or GDP resulting from a spending shock equal to   per cent of
GNP in the initiating country; for an own—country shock, the

elasticity multiplier is the conventional GNP multiplier. They
compared their "naive model" to values obtained from fiscal

simulations under fixed exchange rates from five linkage

projects: LINK, DESMOS, COMET, METEOR and RDX2—MPS. (See Table
3.1.) They found that their naive estimate often fell within the
range of results from the linked model simulations, and they

concluded that the information contributed by the linked models
was quite limited.

     We think that divergence of linked model results from
simple linkage calculations is not a good guide to the
information content of the models. After all, there are some

reasons why the Deardorff/Stern multipliers are too small (for
example, they ignore induced investment and feedback effects
from the second country back to the first country) and there are

other reasons why they are too large (they ignore the

expenditure—reducing effects of induced inflation, induced
higher interest rates, and other forms of supply constraint).
12



Since there is, a priori, no way of deciding whether the "true"
dynamic multipliers, either on average or in any particular

year, should be above or below the simple static multipliers
calculated by Deardorff and Stern, it is not appropriate to use
the extent of divergence as a measure of the information

provided by the linkage projects.
     Although the Deardorff and Stern calculations do not

provide grounds for telling whether anything can be learned from
the linked simulations, they do provide useful benchmark data on
the strength of bilateral trade linkages. Fair (1979) compares
fiscal multipliers for an overlapping but somewhat different set

of linkage projects. In both surveys, only the RDX2—MPS results
involve capital movements and alternative exchange rate systems,

and neither of the surveys deal with the importance of feedback
effects. We have attempted to supplement these earlier surveys
of linkage results. Our survey of expenditure linkages is based
on a larger set of linkage models, and it also attempts to show
the effects of linkage feedbacks, of fixed and flexible exchange

rates, and of the financing used for thegovernment

expenditures.
     Table 3.1 shows the own-country and cross-country real
income effects of bond—financed government spending in each of
the seven major OECD countries. The models include all of those

surveyed by Deardorff and Stern (COMET, DESMOS, LINK, METEOR,
and RDX2-MPS) supplemented by results from a newer version of

LINK, the EPA World Econometric model, INTERLINK, the Fair
model, and the MCM model. The expenditure shock is generally a

bond—financed increase in government spending equal to 1% of
                                                                 13



GNP, although there is an implicit combination of bond and money
finance employed in those cases where the interest rate is held
fixed.

     Each of the seven panels of Table 3.1 shows the results for
all countries of an expenditure increase in one of the

countries. To find the own—country multipliers for, e.g.,
Germany, look in the GE column (where the effects on Germany are
shown) of the third panel (where the effects of the German
fiscal policy are shown). This method of presentation makes it

very easy to compare results from the different models. Anywhere
from one to three years of dynamic multipliers are reported for
each of the models.

     The OECD results reflect accelerator effects but no changes
in prices, interest rates, or exchange rates. All of the other

models have endogenous prices, although the results reported in
the table are all (except for MCM) obtained from fixed-exchange--

rate versions of the respective models. In most of the models,

the assumed monetary policy is an unchanged interest rate. The
money supply is therefore altered by enough to keep the interest
rate constant, implying that the increase in government

expenditure (and any induced changes in the stock of foreign
exchange reserves) is financed by some mix of money, debt, and
induced taxes.

     The assumed monetary policy differs from model to model in
Project LINK, but in general involves unchanged interest rates
(and hence some degree of monetary expansion) in response to

increases in government expenditure. In the Japanese EPA world
model, the official discount rate is the key monetary policy
14




variable in each model, and these interest rates are held

constant in the fiscal policy experiments.
     The MCM results involve a flexible exchange rate and
generally fixed money supplies. The results for Canada and the

U.S. are therefore more comparable to the RDX2-MPS results in

the top panel of Table 3.5 than to the fixed-exchange-rate
results shown elsewhere in Table 3.1. The UK model used in MCM
has an interest—rate reaction function instead of a fixed money
supply. The UK interest rate rises with the Canadian rate, and

the resulting negative effects on GNP outweigh the positive

effects from the UK share of induced Canadian imports.
     The EPA and INTERLINK results are useful for giving some

idea of the feedback effects running from the indirectly
affected countries back to the country initiating the policy.

The evidence on this is obtained by comparing own—country
multipliers from unlinked and fully linked fiscal policy
simulations. The INTERLINK model in its 1980 form is likely to

provide relatively high estimates of these feedbacks, since it

has a complete trade matrix, a fairly complete set of country
models, and has no monetary or price effects, no exchange rate
flexibility, and no supply constraints to limit the passing of

aggregate demand among the trading partners.
     Table 3.2 shows the ratios of the linked to the unlinked
fiscal multipliers for both the OECD and EPA models. The ratio

rises with the size of the country, with the degree of its
openness to trade, and with the ratio of other—country to own—
country multipliers. The last factor is more likely to vary with
the structure of the country models. Both the OECD and the EPA
                                                                 15



 results show linked multipliers to be generally 5% to 15% higher
 than the unlinked multipliers for the five largest OECD
economies. The linked and unlinked multipliers are almost the

 same for Canada, reflecting its relatively small size. The EPA
results for Italy, and most of the other intercountry

differences reveal the importance of model structure in

determining the results. The very large effects of linkage on
the Italian multiplier and on the second—year U.K. multiplier in
the EPA results appear to be a consequence of a very low own—

country multiplier coupled with fairly high multipliers in the
EPA models of the main trading partners.

     Tables 3.3 to 3.5 help to show the effects of alternative

exchange rate and monetary policies. Table 3.3 shows the effects
of exchange rate flexibility in the EPA model by reporting the
ratio of the flexible-exchange—rate to the fixed—exchange—rate

own-country and cross-country multipliers. With key interest
rates held fixed, as in the EPA simulations in Tables 3.3 and
3.4, and in one set of RDX2—MPS results in Table 3.5, an

expansion of government spending leads to an induced trade

deficit, a loss of foreign exchange reserves under fixed
exchange rates, and a depreciation of the currency under

flexible exchange rates. The depreciation of the domestic
currency typically increases the size of the own-country

multiplier and lowers cross—country multipliers. The domestic
price effects of the fiscal policy are greater under flexible

rates than under fixed exchange rates, given a monetary policy
that holds key interest rates constant. As shown by the EPA

results in Table 3.4, the effects on foreign inflation (still
16



assuming fixed interest rates) are substantially greater under

fixed than under flexible exchange rates.
     The chief exception to these generalizations is provided by
the United States, but only in the current version of the EPA

model (Amano et al, eds., 1982). EPA model. In this case,

expansionary fiscal policy, even with unchanged US interest
rates, leads to a strengthening of the US dollar, which then
increases the expansionary effects on other countries. This

result was not evident in the earlier EPA trilateral linkage

results (Amano et al., eds., 1981); it appears to be a

consequence of an implausibly large induced devaluation of the
DM, which in turn appears to be due to an implausibly large

outflow of capital from Germany.
     When countries hold their money supplies rather than their
interest rates fixed, the effect of exchange rate flexibility is

rather different, as shown by comparing the various cases in
Table 3.5. If the domestic balance of payments moves into
incipient surplus, leading to an appreciation of the domestic

currency, the domestic output effects of an expansive fiscal
policy will be smaller, and the foreign effects larger, under
flexible exchange rates. In terms of the familiar IS—LM diagram

with a balance—of-payments or exchange-rate equilibrium curve
added, this will happen if the BP curve is flatter than the LM

curve. The RDX2—MPS results shown in Table 3.5 reveal that this

condition is met in the Canadian—U.S. case, so that fiscal

contraction weakens (and fiscal expansion strengthens) the
domestic currency under flexible exchange rates. Thus exchange—
 rate flexibility slightly reduces the domestic GNP effects, and
                                                                 17



increases the foreign effects, of changes in bond—financed

government expenditure under flexible exchange rates. This
result is what follows if money supplies are held equal to their
control values in both countries, and reverses the effects of
exchange rate flexibility derived from the case where nominal
interest rates are pegged while the fiscal shock takes place.

     Having emphasized that the international transmission of
fiscal shocks depends heavily on the nature of the accompanying
monetary and exchange market policies, we turn now to consider
the available evidence on the international effects of monetary
changes on their own.




4. Transmission of Monetary Policy


     Many of the linkage models primarily emphasize trade
linkages and have not paid equivalent attention to the
mechanisms whereby monetary impulses are transmitted. The EPA
model is one that does, and Table 4.1 shows its own-country and

cross—country effects of separate increases in the official
discount rates of each of the seven major OECD countries. For

all of these countries except the United States, flexible

exchange rates lead to greater negative effects of the

contractionary monetary policy on own GNP, and lesser (and
frequently positive) effects on others' GNP, compared to the
situation with fixed exchange rates. Furthermore, the decrease
in own—country effects for the U.S. is very small. The increase

in own—country GNP effects among the other countries tends to be

greater for the more open economies, although the pattern is not
18



very clear. In all cases, the changes in the cross—country
effects are fairly small in absolute terms, but large relative

to their values under fixed exchange rates.

     The RDX2-MPS results support the EPA finding that the
effects of exchange rate flexibility on the domestic impacts of
monetary policy are much greater for the more open economies.

For example, after two years of tighter monetary policy in
Canada, sufficient to appreciate the Canadian dollar by 3%, the
real output effects are two and a half times as great under
flexible exchange rates as under the Bretton Woods system

(Helliwell and Maxwell, 1974, p. 95). The effects of exchange
rate flexibility on the U.S. were not material in these
experiments, in part because all of the other U.S. bilateral

exchange rates were held constant.

     The RDX2-MPS linkage experiments also indicated that
tighter U.S. monetary policy would lower Canadian GNP much less

under flexible than under fixed exchange rates (Helliwell and
Maxwell, 1974, p. 97), but lower it nonetheless. This

contradicts the well—known result from the Meade—Fleming--Mundell

model (e.g., Mundell, 1963) that tighter monetary policy should
lower GNP at home and raise it abroad. The Mundell result comes

about if capital flows are responsive only to interest—rate
differentials. In order to balance the capital account inflow to

the tight-money home country, there has to be an offsetting

current account deficit, induced by the higher value of the
domestic currency, leading to a higher demand for the real

output of the foreign country. The RDX2—MPS results for U.S.

monetary policy (but not for Canadian monetary policy) reversed
                                                                   19



  this result. The essential reason was that exchange-rate-

  stabilizing capital flows broke the tight link between the
  current account and the interest-induced capital flows,

 permitting there to be simultaneously a strengthening of the
 current account of the home country and interest-induced capital

  inflows, with the sum of these two net inflows offset by

 speculative outflows. The argument was made that the same

                           speculative capital movements that are
 required to "look through" the widely prevalent J—curve effects
 also permit international transmission of tight—money-induced
 drops in GNP.

      The EPA model shows some positive and some negative GNP
 cross-effects in response to monetary policy under flexible

 exchange rates. Amano, et al (1981) describes how the capital
 flow equations of the EPA models are equipped with exchange-

 rate—stabilizing features that would permit them, in principle,
 to have positive cross-country GNP effects. In addition, the

exchange rate mechanism used in solving the models involves a
considerable amount of active official exchange market
intervention. This official intervention also raises the

Possibility of regaining the fixed—exchange—rate result, that

tighter monetary policy lowers GNP both at home and abroad. It
is interesting to note that even with private and official

stabilizing intervention, some of the EPA results show own—

country and cross—country income effects of Opposite sign. This
illustrates, as do the RDX2-MPS results, that the transmission

process need not be symmetric when counties of different size
and structure are linked together.
20



        Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show the effects of coordinated and
                                      in the LINK and MCM models. For
uncoordinated monetary expansion
the five countries that appear in both models, Table 4.2 shows
                                             of initial 1%
the real income and price level consequences
reductions in the key interest rates in all of the countries.
                                                             and
The LINK and MCM results for real income are fairly similar,
                               increases in real income that are
both models show proportionate
                               increases in the price level for
greater than the proportionate
each of the first three years. However, LINK is more optimistic
                                            model used in LINK even
with respect to prices; the US Wharton
 suggests a lower domestic price level after four years of an

 expansionary monetary policy starting in 1980.
      Table 4.3 contrasts the effects of coordinated monetary

 expansion with the consequences of isolated policies. The table

 shows the amount of price increase per percentage point increase
 in output for the fourth years of isolated and coordinated
                                                          with
 monetary expansions. For Project LINK, which is operated
 fixed exchange rates in these experimants, the coordination does

 not make much difference. For the MCM models, however, with
                                    coordination avoids the
 their flexible exchange rates, the
                                                inflation that
 currency depreciation and resulting additional
 would arise if a country were alone in adopting an expansionary

 monetary policy. Thus the coordinated expansion provides a given
 increase in real income with a smaller amount of induced
                                      differs substantially from one
     inflation, although the effect

     country to another.



     5. The Impact of Changes in World Oil Prices
                                                                 21




     One of the most interesting and as yet unsettled issues is

how changes in world oil prices influence real output, national
prices, and exchange rates throughout the world. It is an issue
that almost demands the use of international linkage models,

since the indirect effects coming through changes in the volume
and prices of non—oil world trade are often n'ore important, for

any individual country, than the direct effects of higher oil
prices. For example, simulations of the Bank of Japan model
reported by Yomo (1982) show that a 10% increase in the world
oil price lowers real GNP by .05% if other foreign variables are
unchanged, but lowers it by .28% if the real GNP of partner
countries is assumed to drop by .5% as a consequence of higher
oil prices. Thus most of the likely real GNP effects (but not
the price effects) flow from assumed effects on other countries.
In these circumstances, it is important to obtain more
information about the direct impacts on other countries, and on
the transmission mechanisms between countries.

     Many of the established national and multinational

econometric models were designed before the price of oil changed
so dramatically as to force a re-thinking of the aggregation,

pricing, production, and factor utilization assumptions in
econometric models. Thus, many of the linkage models are not
ideally suited to depict the national effects of changes in

world energy prices. They are likely to feed imperfect
information back into the system of international prices, trade

flows, capital movements, and exchange rates. There is a further

complication at the national level, posed by the complex and
diverse taxing and pricing arrangements that link world oil
22



prices to the prices paid by final energy users in various
countries. Since the prices to final users, especially of
transportation fuels, are often several times as high as the

price of the crude oil content, and the proportionate changes in
crude oil and final energy prices are often very different, the

modelling of these margins becomes very important.
     At the international level, it is clearly important to work
with a group of models large enough to encompass a substantial
share of the output of the trading world and to close the system
by realistic assumptions about the amount and nature of

increased OPEC spending, as well as the likely investment

pattern for OPEC current-account surpluses caused by the higher
oil prices. Hooper and Tryon (1982) have reported alternative
simulations of the MCM model showing that, even in their 5-

country-plus-OPEC model, raising OPEC's induced imports has
substantial impact on the real GNP effects of the 1979—80

increase in world oil prices. For example, they estimate that
raising OPEC imports by 50% (or US$ 50 billion) in 1982, and by
similar proportions in 1979, 1980 and 1981, would have

eliminated the loss of GNP in Japan due to the oil price shock

and would have turned the German loss into a gain. The figures:

Without the increased OPEC spending, the price shock reduces
Japanese GNP by 2.2 per cent; with the extra spending, GNP is
virtually unchanged. Without the spending, German GNP drops .5

per cent; with it, GNP rises by 1.6 per cent.
     We have thus far been unable to develop easily comparable
oil price results from the various linkage projects, and the
models continue to differ importantly in coverage and in the
                                                                   23



likely accuracy and completeness of their modelling of the
impacts of oil prices on the various national economies. We have

nevertheless tried to draw together in Table 5.1 some of the
estimates of the second-year real GNP and price effects of a
hypothetical 10% increase in world oil prices. Since we have
often had to scale results dowr1, and to draw approximate second-
year results from a longer and more complicated set of
responses, we also reproduce some of the primary material in
subsequent tables.

     A rough summary of the results, putting greater weight on
the more complete models, is that a 10% increase in world oil
prices lowers real GNP in a typical industrial country by
between .5% and 1%, in the second year, and increases the

consumer price by somewhat more. The results pertaining to pre—
1979 increases need to be scaled up somewhat to apply to the
early 1980s, because the world oil price doubled between 1979
and 1981, and oil spending has become a larger share of total
costs, and because most models estimate the price elastIcity of
the demand for crude oil to be substantially less than 1.0 in
absolute value.

     The Japanese EPA results in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 are
especially useful in showing how exchange rate flexibility
alters the nature of the transmission process (5)   .   In   the
Japanese case, the oil price increase triggers a substantial

depreciation of the yen, which reduces the real GDP losses but

induces much higher domestic inflation. Given the significant

export dependence of the German and Japanese economies and the

significant swings in their current accounts after the two oil
24



price shocks of the 1970s, it is not surprising that the EPA

linkage results for oil price increases were significantly
altered (and became more stagflationary on average) when the
original three-country system was expanded. Indeed, the GNP cuts

in Table 5.1 are .1 to .4 per cent deeper than those calculated
with the three—country version (Amano, et al., eds., 1981), and

the price impacts are slightly greater. The current EPA trade
linkage model for OPEC imports involves a .21 propensity to
import from current increases in export revenues plus a .52

propensity to spend the previous period's foreign exchange
reserves. Since the EPA model is quarterly, this implies a

substantial re—spending of OPEC oil revenues, although
apparently about one quarter of the incremental oil revenues are

invested abroad in some more permanent form. (6)

     The two sets of Project LINK results reported in Table 5.3
suggest that model revisions between 1978 and 1980 have somewhat

increased the GNP responses of the system to world oil prices.

If we compare the 1980 responses from the 1979-85 simulation
with the 1979 responses from the 1978—79 simulation, we see GNP

and consumer price level responses that are about as large,
although the size of the shock is much smaller - a 12 per cent
oil price increase relative to control in the second year of the
1979—85 simulation, compared to a 28 per cent increase in the

second year of the 1978—79 simulation. In the earlier

simulation, despite the larger shock, eight of 13 countries had
relative GDP drops that were smaller than that for the 13 LINK

countries in the second year of the later simulation. If we make

a linearity assumption to standardize the shocks, the second—
                                                                 25



year GDP response for the 13 countries in the later simulation
is 1.75 times as big as in the earlier one, and the response of

the consumption price deflator is 1.30 times as big. To better
understand the reasons for these disparities, it would be useful
to run comparable oil price shocks with successive versions of
the LINK system, as well as with alternative linkage systems.

     In the linkage results reported in Table 5.1, the
stagflationary effects of higher oil prices tend to lead to
higher nominal and lower real interest rates in most countries.
Marion and Svensson (1982) emphasize that the lower real
interest rates are a natural counterpart of the higher OPEC

saving, and they act to partially offset the income effects of
the terms—of—trade loss for countries that are net debtors as
well as net oil importers.



6. Summary and Implications for Further Research
     In this Section we summarize our preliminary conclusions

and suggest promising directions for further empirical research.
     Our review of the effects of fiscal shocks shows that it is

very important to consider jointly the exchange—rate and
monetary linkages. The amount of evidence available on this

score is still fairly limited, as only the Japanese and RDX2—MPS
results compare the international effects of fiscal shocks under

fixed and flexible exchange rates, and only the latter do so

under alternative monetary policy assumptions. The experiments
suggest that if policy-set interest rates are held at their
control values and exchange rates are fixed, uncoordinated

increases in government spending will usually lead to current
26



account deficits for the initiating country. Under flexible
exchange rates, the induced current account deficits are
smaller, and hence the fiscal policy's effects on GNP in other

countries are likewise less. However, with exchange rates to
some extent policy—determined, as in the EPA model, the fixed

and flexible exchange rate results are not very different. The
RDX2-MPS results with fixed money supplies show even less
difference between fixed and flexible exchange rates; in the
Canadian case, the fiscal policy does not induce much change in
the balance of payments under fixed exchange rates, and hence
little change in the exchange rate under flexible exchange
rates. Other countries will differ to some extent, but in

general it would not be surprising if the short—term
international effects of fiscal policy turn out to be fairly

similar under fixed and flexible exchange rates. Much depends,

of course, on how exchange rates are modelled. The pervasiveness
of 3-curve effects among the linkage models, and the modest size
of estimated long-term elasticities of substitution among
exports from different countries, mean that either official

intervention or exchange—rate-stabilizing private capital
movements are a necessary condition for exchange market

stability.
     Exchange rate flexibility becomes more important when one

considers the international effects of monetary policy. Even

with substantial amounts of exchange—rate smoothing by official
intervention or private sector capital flows, the reported
international effects of monetary policy are markedly different
under fixed and flexible exchange rates. This difference does
                                                                 27



not show up, of course, in the models that concentrate on trade

linkage, but it does appear wherever there are capital account

and exchange rate linkages. The flexible exchange rate does
serve to increase the domestic income and price effects of

domestic monetary policy, and it reduces the foreign effects,
but oily sometimes does it produce the Mundell (1963) result in
which real income moves in opposite directions at home and
abroad.

     The available evidence on the multinational effects of

changes in world oil prices is still fairly limited, and still
somewhat preliminary in nature. This is in part because the
induced OPEC spending and saving behavior are not well and
easily modelled, and in part because the supply sides of many of
the national models, especially the role of energy in the
production process, are still rather rudimentary. As the models
develop, they continue to show substantial stagflationary
effects from higher world oil prices. Conversely, substantial
drops in world oil prices can be expected to produce less
inflation and more growth, although relatively few tests have
been run of the symmetry of the responses of world trade,

output, and inflation with respect to fluctuations in the world
price of oil.

     Our judgment is that many of the past and current empirical
studies of macroeconomic interdependence have produced useful

results. These studies have served to put likely signs on some
of the uncertain theoretical propositions, and to reduce

somewhat the range of uncertainty about the strength of key

linkages. However, despite the sometimes heroic efforts of the
28



researchers, and despite the assistance of a few interpretive
surveys, many linkage models still have too much the reputation

of black boxes. This reputation is largely unjustified for the
linkage models reported here, because they are models for which

the equation structures and parameter estimates are generally
available. To some extent, the reputation reflects the
unwillingness of those only peripherally interested in
quantitative results to make the required investment in
knowledge about macroeconomic facts and models. However, it is

also the case that the models themselves are seldom presented in
a way that makes it feasible, even for their operators, to
assess the relative quantitative importance of the various
channels of international linkage. Such information is in short

supply, even for national models, so it is not surprising that
still less is available for the linkage projects, most of which

are of fairly recent origin.
     Empirical studies of macroeconomic interdependence have
been producing useful results for over a decade. The earliest

studies were mainly of two types: large multilateral projects
based mainly on linkage through trade flows and trade prices,
and bilateral or few-country models with a more complete and

consistent modelling of trade, capital, exchange rate, and,

occasionally, migration linkages. More recently, the
availability of better multi-country data sets has made possible
the construction of many-country models based on consistent

aggregate theoretical structures and emphasizing monetary and
exchange rate linkages. At the same time, forecasting models
such as Project LINK, the OECD INTERLINK, and the EEC Eurolink
                                                                 29



models have moved some way towards a complete specification of

monetary and capital account linkages, and modellers have been
examining and ironing out unnecessary differences among the
structures of the individual country models.

     The use of structural econometric models for policy
analysis has been criticized for not taking explicit account of
the possible effects of such policy actions on private sector
expectations. To the extent that this criticism is valid, it
applies as much to the international linkage models assessed
here as to national econometric models. The ability of the
linkage models to depict accurately the international

repercussions of national policy changes depends on the policies
being not much more or less predictable or exploitable than

previous ones. The sensitivity of model results to changes in

the formation of expectations is especially great under flexible
exchange rates. Increasing attention is likely to be paid to
these issues as flexible exchange rates become a more general
feature of linkage models.

     There has arisen a distinction, emphasized in the linkage
context by Fair (1979), between small and large national models
as building blocks for empirical studies of macroeconomic
interdependence. From our survey of model structures and
results, we conclude that the actual size of the models in

question is much less important, from the point of view of the
user of results, than the ease with which the properties of the

models can be fully understood and described. Thus we have found
it easier to interpret and assess the reliability of results

from some of the larger models (e.g. those of the Japanese EPA
30



project) than from the constellation of smaller models in our

group Iv projects. Of course, this is partly because some of the
latter projects are at a very early stage of development and

hence not very well tested, corrected, and understood.
     What is needed, in our view, for all of the models, are

clearer explanations of the comparative properties of the
component national models, as well as a clearer analytical and
empirical decomposition of the strength and nature of the links

between countries. Hickman and Filatov (1982), in their

decomposition of international trade multipliers, provide a
useful move in this direction, but there is much more in the way
of comparative macroeconomics that can usefully be done within
the context of linked econometric models. (7)   Indeed, this

comparative analysis is probably a necessary element in
understanding the reasons for many of the particular linkage
results and an important aid to the design of better empirical

models.
                                                             31



                           Footnotes

1. Hickman (1982) surveys a broad range of model types that were
presented at a 1980 conference, with an emphasis on models with
global coverage. Courbis (1981) surveys some of the
multinational econometric models and general equilibrium trade
models presented at a 1976 conference. Whalley and Shoven are in
the process of surveying the general equilibrium world trade
models.
2. The main strategy and results of Project LINK are recorded in
three North-Holland volumes, respectively edited by R.J. Ball
(1973), J.L. Waelbroeck (1976) and J.A. Sawyer (1979). The main
simulation results we shall refer to in this chapter are from
Hickman (1974), Johnson and Klein (1974), Hickman and Schleicher
(1978), Klein (1978), Filatov, Hickman and Klein (1982), and
Klein, Simes and Voisin (1981).

     The Eurolink model, which is run by the Commission of the
European Communities in Brussels, joins quarterly models of the
United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany, with the system
being closed by a "Rest of the World" model. The trade linkages
are described in Ranuzzi (1981) and some alternative exchange
rate and capital market linkages by Ranuzzi and Anthemus (1981).
It is intended to add models for the other E.E.C. countries, for
Canada, and for the United States.
3. Hickman (1981) describes the current and planned treatment of
exchange rates within Project LINK.
4. Amano et al, 1981. In other work, Gana, Hickman, Lau and
Jacobson (1979) report a comparison of results from application
of the Klein-Van Peeterssen and the Hickman-Lau methods to a
four—commodity—class disaggregation of world trade. They find
the Hickman-Lau method better for imports of commodity group
SITC 5-9, and the Klein-Van Peeterssen method better for total
world trade, GDP, and total exports and trade balances of
individual countries. They also found that both methods
generally dominated the assumptions of constant export shares in
terms of either value or volume, although the latter provided
the best estimates of SITC 5-9 exports.
5. Table 5.1 also shows the exchange rate changes for the MCM
and Fair models. However, there are no comparable results run
under fixed exchange rates. McGuirk (1982) uses the
International Monetary Fund's multilateral exchange rate model
(MERM, Artus and McGuirk 1981) to estimate the real exchange
rate changes required to eliminate the trade imbalances caused
by the OPEC price increases. The summary discussion in that
volume contains an attempt to compare and reconcile the MCM and
MERM results.
6. Amano et al., eds. (1982), p. 376. While 21 per cent of oil
export revenues are spend on current imports, only 56 per cent
ultimately goes into foreign exchange reserves. This implies
that the remaining 23 per cent is invested abroad in some form
other than official foreign exchange reserves.
7. De Bever et al (1979) provide an example of the quantitative
decomposition and comparison of model properties that we think
could usefully be applied to whole sets of country models.
32



                         References

Amano, Akihiro (1982) "Exchange rate modelling in the EPA world
econometric model", prepared for International Workshop on
Exchange Rates in Multi- country Econometric Models, University
of Leuven, Belgium, 26-28 November, 1981.
Amano, Akihiro, Sadahiro Akira and Takahiro Sasaki (1981)
"Structure and application of the EPA world econometric model",
Discussion Paper No. 22, Economic Research Institute, Japan.
Amano, A., E. Kurihara and L. Samuelson (1980) "Trade Linkage
Sub-Models in the EPA World Economic Model", Economic Bulletin
No. 19, Economic Research Institute, Japan.
Amano, Akihiro, Akira Maruyama and Masura Yoshitomi, eds, (1981)
A three—country linkage model (Economic Planning Agency, Tokyo).
Amano, Akihiro, Akira Maruyama and Masura Yoshitomi, eds, (1982)
EPA world economic model, Volumes I and II (Economic Planning
Agency, Tokyo).
Artus, Jacques R. and Anne Kenny McGuirk (1981) "A revised
version of the Multilateral Exchange Rate Model", I.M.F. Staff
Papers , 28, 2, 275—309.
Ball, R.3., ed.,(1973) The international linkage of national
economic models (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Barten, A.P., G. d'Alcantara, and G.J. Carrin (1976) "COMET: A
medium-term macroeconomic model for the European Economic
Community," European Economic Review, 7:63-115.
Barten, A.P. and C. d'Alcantara (1977) "Models of Bilateral
Trade Flows", in H. Albach, E. Helmstadter and R. Henn, eds.,
Quantitative Wirtschaftsforschung. Wilhelm Krelle zum 60.
Gebu,rtstag, (J.C.B.' Mohr, Tubingen), 43-57.
Corden, W,M. and J.P. Neary (1982) "Booming sector and de-
industrialisation in a small open economy", Institute for
International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No. 195.

Courbis, Raymond, ed.,(1981) International trade and
multicountry models (Economica, Paris).
d'Alcantara, G. and A. Italianer (1981) Bilateral trade flows in
the COMET model, prepared for the LINK Conference, La Hulpe,
Belgium, 30 August - 4 September, 1981.
Darby, Michael R. (1980) "International transmission under
pegged and floating exchange rates: An empirical comparison",
N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 585.
Darby, Michael R., James R. Lothian, Arthur E. Gandolfi, Anna 3.
Schwartz, and Alan C. Stockman (1982) The international
transmission of inflation, Volume 1 (National Bureau of Economic
                                                                 33



Research, Cambridge).

De Bever, L., D.K. Foot, J.F. Helliwell, G.V. Jump, T. Maxwell,
J.A. Sawyer, and H.E.L. Waslander (1979) "Dynamic properties of
four Canadian macroeconomic models: A collaborative research
project", Canadian Journal of Economics

Deardorff, A.V. and R.M. Stern (1978) "Modeling the effects of
foreign prices on domestic price determination: Some econometric
evidence and implications for theoretical analysis", Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review , 127:333-353.

Deardorff, A.V. and R.M. Stern (1979) "What have we learned from
linked econometric models? A comparison of fiscal-policy
simulations", Banca Nazionale del Lavoro , 130:415—432.
Dramais, A. (1981) "The DESMOS model", in Raymond Courbis, ed.,
International trade and multicountry models (Economica, Paris),
221—234.

Fair, R.C. (1979) "On modelling the economic linkages among
countries", in R. Dornbusch and S. Fischer, eds., International
economic policy, theory and evidence (The Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore and London), 209—245.
Fair, Ray C. (1981a) "A multicountry econometric model",
N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 414R.

Fair, Ray C. (1981b) "Estimated output, price, interest rate,
and exchange rate linkages among countries", N.B.E.R. Working
Paper No. 677. (NBER, Cambridge).

Fair, Ray C. (1981c) "Estimated effects of relative prices on
trade shares", N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 696.

Fair, Ray C. (1982) "Estimated output, price, interest rate, and
exchange rate linkages among countries", Journal of Political
Economy, 90:

Filatov, Victor, Bert G. Hickman, and Lawrence R. Klein (1982)
"Long—term simulations with the Project Link System, 1978—1985",
in B.G. Hickman, ed., Global international economic models
(Proceedings of the 8th IIASA Symposium on Global Modeling).
Hickman, Bert G. and L.J. Lau (1973) "Elasticities of
Substitution and Export Demands in a World Trade Model",
European Economic Review, Vol.4.

Gana, Jorge L., Bert G. Hickman, Lawrence J. Lau, and Laurence
R. Jacobson (1979) "Alternative approaches to the linkage of
national econometric models", in J. A. Sawyer, (Editor)
Modelling the international transmission mechanism. (North—
Holland, Amsterdam).

Helliwell, John F. (1974) "Trade capital flows, and migration as
channels for international transmission of stabilizing
34



policies", in International aspects of stabilization policies
(Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 241-278.
Helliwell, John F. (1975) "Adjustment under fixed and flexible
exchange rates", in Peter B. Kenen, ed., International trade and
finance , (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), 379—410.
Helliwell, John F. and Tom Maxwell (1974) "Monetary
interdependence of Canada and the United States under
alternative exchange rate systems", in R.Z. Aliber, ed.,
National monetary policies and the international system
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 82—108.
Helliwell, John F. and Robert McRae (1977) "The interdependence
of monetary, debt and fiscal policies in an international
setting", in Robert Z. Aliber ed., The political economy of
monetary reform (The Macmillan Press Ltd., London), 157—178.
Hickman, Bert G. (1974) "international transmission of economic
fluctuations and inflation", in Albert Ando, Richard Herring and
Richard Marston, eds., International aspects of stabilization
policies (Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 201—231.
Hickman, Bert G. (1981) "Exchange rates in Project LINK",
prepared for the International Workshop on Exchange Rates in
Multicouritry Econometric Models, University of Leuven, Belgium,
26-28 November, 1981.
Hickman, Bert G. (1982) "A cross section of global international
economic models", in B.G. Hickman, ed., Global international
economic models (Proceedings of the 8th IIASA Symposium on
Global Modeling).
Hickman, Bert G. and Victor Filatov (1982) "on a decomposition
of international income multipliers", Center for Research in
Economic Growth, Stanford University, Research Memoranda Series
No. 250. To be published in Global econometrics, essays in honor
of Lawrence P. Klein, Bert Hickman and F.G. Adams, editors, (MIT
Press, Cambridge), 1983.
Hickman, Bert G. and S. Schleicher (1978) "The interdependence
of national economies and the synchronization of economic
fluctuations: Evidence from the LINK Project",
Welfwirtschaftliches Archly. 114:642—708.

Hooper, Peter, Richard D. Haas and Steven A. Symansky (1981)
"Revision of exchange rate determination in the MCM: A progress
report", prepared for the International Workshop on Exchange
Rates in Multicountry Models, University of Leuven, Belgium, 26-
28 November, 1981.
Hooper, Peter and Ralph Tryon (1982) "Macroeconomic and exchange
rate effects of an oil price shock under alternative OPEC
investment scenarios", In K. Clinton, ed., Proceedings of the
Fifth Pacific Basin Central Bank Economists' Conference: Supply
Side Shocks, the balance of Payments and Monetary Policy (Bank
                                                                  35



of Canada, Ottawa).

Howe, Howard, Ernesto Hernandez—Cata, Guy Stevens, Richard
Berner, Peter Clark, and Sung Y. Kwack (1981) "Assessing
international interdependence with a multi-country model",
Journal of Econometrics 15:65—92.

Italianer, A. (1982) "An evaluation of the bilateral trade flows
in the COMET model", Katholieke Universiteit Leuven

Johnson, K.N. (1978) "Balance of Payments Equilibrium and
Equilibrating Exchange Rates in a World Econometric Model",
unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Johnson, Keith N. and Lawrence R. Klein (1974) "Stability in the
international economy: The LINK experience", in Albert Ando,
Richard Herring and Richard Marston, eds., International aspects
of stabilization policies (Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 147—
188.

Klein, Lawrence R. (1978) "Disturbances to the international
economy", in After the Phillips curve: Persistence of high
inflation and high unemployment , (Federal Reserve Bank,
Boston), 84—103.
Klein, Lawrence R. and A. Van Peetersson (1973) "Forecasting
World Trade within Project LINK", in R.J. Ball, ed., The
International Linkage of National Economic Models (North-Holland
Publishing Co., Amsterdam).
Klein, Lawrence P., Richard Simes, and Pascal Voisin (1981)
"Coordinated monetary policy and the world economy", Prevision
et Analyse economique 2:75-105.
McGuirk, Anne Kenny (1982) "The oil price increases and real
exchange rate changes among industrial countries", in K.
Clinton, ed., Proceedings of the Fifth Pacific Basin Central
Bank Economists' Conference: Supply Side Shocks, The Balance of
Payments and Monetary Policy (Bank of Canada, Ottawa)
Marion, Nancy Peregrim and Lars E.O. Svensson (1982) "Structural
differences and macroeconomic adjustment to oil price increases
in a three- country model", N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 839.

Kooyman, Jan (1982) "The METEOR model", in Raymond Courbis, ed.,
International trade and multicountry models (Economica, Paris),
235—242.

Minford, Patrick, C. Ioarinidis and S. Marwaha (1981) "Floating
exchange rates in a multilateral macro model", prepared for
International Workshop on Exchange Rates in Multi- country
Econometric Models, University of Leuven, Belgium, 26-28
November, 1981.

Moriguchi, C. (1973) "Forecasting and Simulation Analysis of the
World Economy", American Economic Review 63, No.2.
36



Mundell, Robert A. (1963) "Capital mobility and stabilization
policy under fixed and flexible exchange rates", Canadian
Journal of Economics and Political Science 29:475—485.

OECD (1979) "The OECD international linkage model. OECD Economic
Outlook, Occasional Studies (OECD, Paris).
OECD (1980) "Fiscal policy simulations with the OECD
international Linkage model: Incomes policy in theory and
practice" (OECD, Paris).
OECD (1982) OECD Interlink System: Structure and operation
Volume 1 (OECD, Paris).
Ranuzzi, P. (1981) "The experience of the E.E.C. Eurolink
Project in modeling bilateral trade linkage equations", 3.
Policy Modeling , 3:153—173.
Ranuzzi, Paolo and Paulette Anthemus (1981) "Eurolink model:
Monetary linkages", prepared for International Workshop on
Exchange Rates in Multi— country Econometric Models, University
of Leuven, Belgium, 26-28 November, 1981.
Sachs, Jeffrey (1980) "Energy and growth under flexible exchange
rates: A simulation study", N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 582.
Samuelson, L. and E. Kurihara (1980) "OECD Trade Linkage Methods
Applied to the EPA World Econometric Model", Economic Bulletin
No. 18, Economic Research Institute, Japan.

Sawyer, J.A., ed.,(1979) Modelling the international
transmission mechanism (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Shishido, Shuntaro, Masuo Aiso, Hironori Fujiwara and Takao
Fukuchi (1981) "Revised version of Tsukuba-Fais world
econometric model (T-FAIS V)"1 prepared for the LINK Conference,
La Hulpe, Belgium, 30 August - 4 September.
Stevens, Guy, Richard Berner, Peter Clark, Ernesto Hernandez-
Cata, Howard Howe, and Sung Kwack (1982) "The U.S. economy in an
interdependent world: A multi-currency model (Federal Reserve
Board, Washington).
Waelbroeck, Jean L., ed.,(1976) The models of Project LINK
(North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Waelbroeck, Jean, and A. Dramais (1974) "DESMOS: A model for the
coordination of economic policies in the EEC countries", in A.
Ando, R. Herring and R. Marston, eds., International aspects of
stabilization policies (Federal Reserve Bank, Boston), 285—347.

Yomo, Hiroshi (1982) "The macroeconomic impact of increased
energy prices for Japan", in K. Clinton, ed., Proceedings of the
Fifth Pacific Basic Central Bank Economists' Conference: Supply
Side Shocks, The Balance of Payments and Monetary Policy (Bank
of Canada, Ottawa).
                                                                        Table 2.1
                                                            Classification of linkage models.
Model   and reference              Trade Linkage            Monetary Linkage          Exchange rates           Country coverage
     Group   I:


Linkage of available
national models.

1.   Project LINK                  Klein/Van Peeterssen     Capital flows among       Fixed in long term       18 OECD countries,
     (Ball 1973, Wael-                                      developed countries,      simulations. F bat ing   seven Comecon countries,
     broeck 1976,                                           but Only in short term    according to reaction    and four developing regions.
     Sawyer.      1979)                                            1
                                                            Si mu at ions             functions or PPP.
2.   Eurolink                      Bilateral imports        Total inflows set         Fixed or managed         Germany. Italy. France
     (Ranuzzi      1981)           determined by total      by portfolio balance      float with structural    U.K and ROW.
                                   imports and competing                              balance of payments
                                   export prices                                      approach.


     Group   II:

Linkage of structural
models built with
monetary and exchange
rate linkages in mind.
I.   EPA World                     Hi ckman/Lau             Incomes, assets.          Fixed or managed         Major seven OECD countries
     Econometric Model                                      and interest rates.       float with exchange-     plus Australia. S. Korea.
     (Amano et a! 1982)                                                               rate bands and reserve   and six t-adlng
                                                                                      flow target.             regions.

2.   MCM                           Bilateral imports        Multilateral service      Fixed or flexible        U.S..   Canada. Japan
     (Howe et al 1981)             determined by income,    account and direct        with inverted capital    U.K..   Germany and ROW
                                   and Importer, exporter   investment flows.         account portfol 10-
                                   and competitor prices                              balance equation.
3. ROX2-MPS                        Bilateral                Interest rates and        Fixed. Bretton Woods.    Canada and U.S.
     (Helllwell 1974)                                       portfolio balance         flexible and crawling
                                                                                      peg.


     Group III:
Models with a common
structure, main focus
on trade linkages and
no monetary linkages.

1.   INTERLINK                     Modif led                None                      Fixed                    23 DECO countries
     (OECD   1982)                                I
                                   Samuel son/Kur hara                                                         plus eight regions.
2. COMET                           d Alcantara/Barten/      None                      F1   xed                 II European countries,
     (Barten et      al    1976)   Ital ianer                                                                  U.S.. Japan and 5
                                                                                                               regions
3.   DESMOS                 Hickman/Lau with        None                        Fixed                    8 EEC countries
     (Waelbroeck and        income and capacity                                                          and U.S. with trade
     Dramais, 1976,         utilization adjustments                                                      links to Japan and
     and Dramais, 1981)                                                                                  three regions

4.   METEOR                 Mod   i   f   i   ed       None                     Fixed                    6 EEC   countries plus U.S.,
                 1982)      Samuel son/Kur hara    i                                                     Japan. Canada   arid 5
     (Kooyman,
                                                                                                         regions

     Group IV

Groupings of small
national models with
common structure focussed
on monetary and exchange-
rate linkages.

1.   Fair (1981a)           Export share equations     Capital flow equations   Exchange rate            64 countries plus ROW
                                                       interest rate            reaction functions
                                                       reaction functions

2.   Darby et al (1982)     Indirect                   Interest rates           Fixed and flexible       Seven major
                                                       and reserve flows        rates from inverted      OECD countries
                                                                                import demand equation   plus Netherlands.

3.   Minfordet al(1981)     Indirect                   Interest rates           Real interest parity     Seven major OECD
                                                       and reserve flows        condition on real        plus Netherlands, Belgium
                                                                                exchange rate.           and three regions (with
                                                                                                         trade links only).
I    See appendix for a detailed discussion of trade linkages.
                                    Table 3.1
  Impacts of fiscal shocks with the LINK, OECD INTERLINK, EPA World Econometric
  Model, mini-METEOR, DESMOS. Fair, COMET, RDX2-MPS, Deardorff-Stern Naive, and
            I
MCM models.  Impacts are presented as percentage change in income for a shock of
                one per cent of income in the initiating country.


   Income       Model   Simulation                    Impact on income
   shock                  year 2                            in
     in                                  US     JA     GE      FR    UK     IT       CA

    US      LINK(a)       I          1.18      0.13   0.04   0.02   0.08   0.08     0.31
    US      LINK(a)       2          1.87      0.27   0.08   0.04   0.21   0.17     0.56
    US      LINK(a)       3          2.58      0.40   0.14   0.06   0.35   0.31     0.86
    US      LINK(b)       1          1.60      0.13   0.13   0.05   0.08   0.14     0.53
    US      LINK(b)       2          2.39      0.20   0.21   0.06   0.12   0.21     0.63
    US      LINK(b)       3          2.73      0.22   0.33   0.07   0.13   0.26     0.63

    US      INTERLINK     2          1.52      0.18   0.20   0.16   0.21   0.19     0.59
    US      INTERLINK     3          2.06      0.34   0.43   0.34   0.39   0.39     0.93
    US      EPA                      1   .59   0.11   0.09   0.07   0.22   0.06     0.46
    US      EPA           2          2.60      0.33   0.25   0.27   0.56   0. 20    0.83
    US      EPA           3          3 29.     0.53   0.37   0.44   0.70   0. 34    1.41

    US      METEOR        1          2.46      0.22   0.19   0.12   0.19   0.15     0.65
    US      METEOR        2          2.86      0.45   0.43   0.30   0.45   0.34     1.29

    US      RDX2-MPS      2          2.03                                          -0.15
    US      RDX2-MPS      4          0.93                                          0.28
    US      Naive         Any        2.24      1.12   0.07   0.03   0.10   0.07    0.65
    US      MCM           1          1.98      0.14   0.16          0.10           0.34
    US      MCM           2          1.90      0.21   0.32          0.16           0.54
    US      MCM           3          1.43      0.20   0.38          0.08           0.61

    US      Fair                     1.43      0.06   0.05   0.03   0.07   0.04    0.18
    US      Fair          2          1.39      0.18   0.19   0.01   0.21   0.19    0.55


    1iA     LINK(a)       I          0.02      1.18   0.01   0.00   0.02   0.01    0.02
    JA      LINK(a)       2          0.04      1.50   0.01   0.01   0.04   0.02    0.04
    JA      LINK(a)       3          0.06      1.50   0.02   0.01   0.06   0.03    0.04

    JA      LINK(b)
    JA      LINK(b)       2          0.03      1.15   0.04   0.01   0.02   0.04    0.03
    JA      LINK(b)       3          0.04      1.22   0.06   0.02   0.03   0.05    0.04

    JA      INTERLINK     2          0.04      1.41   0.05   0.04   0.06   0.04    0.06
    JA      INTERLINK     3          0.08      1.97   0.13   0.10   0.13   0.13    0.12

    JA      EPA                      0.02      1.45   0.04   0.02   0.05   0.02    0.05
    JA      EPA           2          0.02      2.17   0.11   0.11   0.15   0.08    0.12
JA   EPA         3       0.03   2.38   0.16         0.18   0.17   0.11    0.18
JA   Naive       Afly   0.03    1.69   0.01         0.01   0.01   0.01    0.05
JA   MCM                0.08    1.21   0.02                0.02           0.02
JA   MCM         2      0.10    1.50   0.03                0.04           0.04
JA   MCM         3      0.03    1.63   0.02                0.07           0.03


GE   LINK(a)            0.04    0.04   0.98         0.08   0.10   0.19    0.05
GE   LINK(a)     2      0.11    0.09   1 38.        0.16   0.25   0.42    0.10
GE   LINK(a)     3      0.26    0.18   1 20.        0.21   0.53   0.81    0.35
GE   LINK(b)            0.04    0.06   1.83         0.11   0.09   0.28    0.06
GE   LINK(b)     2      0.10    0.11   I.87         0.12   0.12   0.35    0.09
GE   LINK(b)     3      0.16    0.17   2.91         0.17   0.19   0.52    0.13
GE   INTERLINK   2      0.11    0.13   I   .   96   0.40   0.34   0.46    0.07
GE   INTERLINK   3      0.11    0.13   1   .   96   0.40   0.34   0.46    0.14

GE   EPA                0.01    0.04   I   .44      0.19   0.12   0. 14   0.04
GE   EPA         2       0.02   0.14   I . 98       0.66   0.34   0.42    0.12
GE   EPA         3      -0.00   0.24   1   .77      0.84   0.33   0. 56   0.18

GE   METEOR             0.05    0.04   1   .75      0.16   0.09   0.17    0.04
GE   METEOR      2      0.13    0.09       .06      0.29   0.20   0.27    0.13
GE   DESMOS                            1   .25      0.08   0.04   0.08
GE   DESMOS      3                             56   0.14   0.08   0.16
GE   COMET                             I .29        0.16   0.08   0.24
GE   COMET       8                     0.87         0.44   0.24   0. 40
GE   Naive       Any    0.02    0.01   1   .50      0.10   0.03   0.13    0.02

GE   MCM                0.06    0.02   1   .45             0.04           0.01
GE   MCM         2      0.07    0.05   I .95               0.10           0.02
GE   MCM         3      -0.03   0.10   2.20                0.16           0.01

GE   Fair               0.02    0.02   2 . 36       0.25   0.12   0.20    0.01
GE   Fair        2      0.02    0.06   2 36.        0.46   0.17   0.48    0.03



FR   LINK(a)     1      0.01    0.01   0.04         1.21   0.04   0.07    0.02
FR   LINK(a)     2      0.02    0.01   0.05         1.19   0.05   0.08    0.01
FR   LINK(a)     3      0.01    0.00   0.06         1.22   0.04   0.11    0.00
FR   LINK(b)     1      0.02    0.03   0.09         1.07   0.03   0.09    0.03
FR   LINK(b)     2      0.03    0.04   0.12         1.07   0.04   0.11    0.04
FR   LINK(b)     3      0.04    0.05   0.19         1.07   0.06   0.14    0.05
FR   INTERLINK   2      0.04    0.04   0.19         1.31   0.13   0.18    0.05
FR   INTEPLINK   3      0.08    0.09   0.40         1.82   0.25   0.35    0.10
 FR    EPA                     0.01   0.01   0.07    1.85
FR                                                                 0.06             0.06     0.01
      EPA                 2    0.01   0.05   0.24    3 .02         0.21             0.19     0.05
FR    EPA                 3    0.03   0.11   0.32    2 .63         0.23             0.30     0.09
FR    METEOR                   0.04   0.03   0.14            78    0.07             0.11     0.03
FR    METEOR          2        0.09   0.06           1. 1€
                                             0.23                  0.15             0.18     0.08
FR    DESMOS                                 0.07    1   .
                                                        46         0.03             0.05
FR    DESMOS          3                      0.09    1.61          0.04             0.08
FR    Naive           A fly    0.01   0.01   0.08    1   .72      0.03              0.09     0.01


UK    LINK(a)         1        0.01   0.01   0.02   0.01           1.24             0.03     0.03
UK    LINK(a)         2        0.04   0.03   0.03   0.02           1.69             0.06     0.06
UK    LINK(a)         3        0.05   0.03   0.04   0.02           1.51             0.08     0.05
UK    LINK   (   b)            0.02   0.03   0.08   0.03           1.07         0.08         0.05
UK    LINK(b)         2        0.04   0.05   0.11   0.04           I.      14   0.11         0.07
UK    LINK(b)         3        0.06   0.05   0.17   0.05           I.      16   0.13         0.08
UK    INTERLINK       2        0.03   0.04   0.11   0.09           1.   16      0.09         0.07
UK    INTERLINK       3        0.06   0.08   0.23   0.19           I   .43      0.19         0.12
UK    EPA                      0.01   0.03   0.08   0.10          1.31          0.05         0.04
UK    EPA             2        0.02   0.09   0.23   0.30          0. 78         0.15         0.11
UK    EPA             3        0.01   0.14   0.26   0.38          0.65          0.22         0.15
UK    METEOR                   0.04   0.03   0.07   0.06          I    .   55   0.05         0.08
UK    METEOR          2        0.11   0.07   0.15   0.12          1    .23      0.11         0.16
UK    D E SMOS                               0.02   0.02          I.       19   0.02
UK    DESMOS          3                      0.04   0.03          1 .      29   0.04
UK       I
      Na ye           A fly    0.01   0.01   0.03   0.03                   57   0.03         0.04
UK    MCM                      0.05   0.01   0.02                 1.15                       0.02
UK    MCM             2        0.07   0.03   0.03                      •
                                                                     20                      0.03
UK    MCM             3        0.03   0.03   0.03                 I. 15                      0.02


IT    LINK (a)                 0.01   0.01   0.02   0.02          0.03            30         0.02
IT    LINK(a)         2        0.03   0.02   0.03   0.03          0.06          1.51         0.02
IT    LINK(a)         3        0.05   0.03   0.05   0.04          0.08           .80         0.03
IT    LINK(b)                  0.01   0.02   0.07   0.03          0.02          1.61         0.02
IT    LINK ( b)       2        0.04   0.05   0.16   0.06          0.06          1   .83      0.05
IT    LINK(b)         3        0.06   0.05   0.20   0.06          0.06          1   .94      0.05
IT    INTERLINK       2        0.02   0.02   0.08   0.08          0.05          1.      16   0.02
IT    INTEPLINK       3        0.04   0.04   0.18   0.16          0.11          1   .   54   0.05
IT    EPA                     0.02    0.02   0.14   0.19          0.09          1   . 18
IT                                                                                           0.03
      EPA             2       -0.02   0 08   0.30   0.43          0.15          I   .   39   0.08
   IT      EPA          3          0.00    0.12    0.34   0.53   0.17    1.68   0.12

   IT      DESMOS       1                          0.05   0.04   0.03    1.69
   IT      DESMOS       3                          0.09   0.08   0.05    2.37

   IT      Naive        Any        0.01    0.00    0.05   0.06   0.02    1.70   0.01



   CA      LINK(a)      1          0.08    0.02    0.02   0.01   0.05    0.03   1.15
   CA      LINK(a)      2          0.12    0.05    0.03   0.01   0.09    0.05   1.15
   CA      LINK(a)      3          .0.13   0.04    0.03   0.01   0.08    0.06   0.79

   CA      LINK(b)      I          0.02    0.01    0.01   0.00   0.01    0.01   1.38
   CA      LINK(b)      2          0.04    0.01    0.02   0.00   0.01    0.02   1.3€
   CA      LINK(b)      3          0.05    0.01    0.02   0.0l   0.01    0.02   1.37

   CA      INTERLINK    2          0.05     0.0l   0.02   0.01   0.03    0.02   1.27
   CA      INTERLINK    3          0.07     0.03   0.04   0.03   0.05    0.03   1.49

   CA      EPA          1          0.02     0.01   0.01   0.01   0.02    0.01   1.52
   CA      EPA          2          0.06     0.06   0.06   0.06   0.07    0.05   1.97
   CA      EPA          3          0.09     0.11   0.11   0.12   0.09    0.07   1.84

   CA      RDX2-MPS     2          -0.04                                        0.89
    CA     RDX2-MPS     4          -0.09                                        0.80

    CA     Naive        Any        0.05     001    001    0.00   0.02    0.01   1.50

    CA     MCM          1           0.12    0.02   0.02          0.00           1.04
    CA     MCM          2           0.17    0.03   0.03          -0.01          1.00
    CA     MCM          3           0.12    0.01   0.03          -0.02          1.00



  Sources for the results are as follows: for METEOR
and Naive, Deardorff and Stern (1979); for
LINK(a), Hickman(1974); for LINK(b), Filatov, Hickman
and Klein(1982)     ;
                  for RDX2-MPS. Helliwell(1974); for
DESMOS. Waelbroeck and Dramais(1974); for Fair,
Fair(1982); for COMET. Barten et al(1976)    for
                                             ;


INTERLINK, OECD(1980); for EPA ,  Amano,
et al(l982). The MCM results were produced for
this survey.
  Simulation period for LINK(a) was 1973-75; for LINK(b)
1979-82; for DESMOS, 1970-74; for COMET,
1973-80; for RDX2-MPS. 1963-70; for MCM.
1975-78;for Fair, 19761-771V;
for INTERLINK. 1978-80; for EPA, 1974-77.
                          Table 3.2
       Ratio of linked to unlinked government spending
                        multipliers.


Country          OECD                  EPA

             1st year   2nd year   1st year   2nd year

  US          1.05        1.08      1.02        1.08
  UA          1.01        1.04      1.12        1.13
  GE          1.11        1.20      1.05        1.10
  FR          1.07        1.12      1.01        1.03
  UK          1.06        1.12      1.03        1.40
  IT          1.05        1.08      1.26        1.70
  CA          1.01        1.01      1.00        1.00

  Calculated from data in OECD (1980). and Amano et
al (1982).
                                    Table 3.3
   Effect of endogenizing exchange rates in the EPA World Econometric Model.'
Displayed are the ratios of the fiscal multiplier With exchange rates endogenous
   to the multiplier when the exchange rate is exogenous. Actual values of the
  multipliers with endogenous exchange rates are given in Table 3.1. Impacts on
                prices and exchange rates are given in Table 3.4.
 Increase in                                    Multiplier ratio
 Expenditure    Year                                 for
     in                   US       JA      GE        FR         UK            IT        CA

                1974                       4.000    1.000   1.225         1   .
                                                                             197        0.842
    US                   1.016     1.000
    US          1975     1.042    0.964    4.102   0.952      195         1.689         0.882
                1976     1.063             5.444   2.030    1.111         I   .
                                                                             346        0.807
    US                            0.879
    US          1977     1.135    0.902    6.361   3.165      364         1   .
                                                                             374        1.019

     iA         1974     0.474 0.987       0.757    1.000     000         1.474         1.000
     JA         1975     0.474 1.013       0.504   0.920    0.874         1 .000        0.919
                1976                       0.312   0.944                  1   .   000   0.722
     JA                 -0.333 1.084                        0.882
     JA         1977     Small     1.198   0.216   0.721    1   .   050   0.847         0.469

                1974                       0.923   0.927    0.937         1   .   lOG   1.216
     GE                  Small     1.000
     GE         1975    -1.467 0.789       1.139   0.762    0.781         0.964         0.874
                197€                       1.584   0.773    0.952         1   .
                                                                             150        0.707
     GE                  Large 0.613
     GE         1977    -2.500 0.513       2.485   0.778        .968        405         0.682

     FR         1974     1.000     1.000   0.373    1.014           000   0.712         1.000
     FR         1975     2.941    0.680    0.357    1.083   0.919         0.953         0.680
     FR         1976     1.692    0.667    0.378    1.083   0.771         0.882         0.805
     FR         1977     2.056    0.458    0.315    1.157   0.626'        0.667         0.696

     UK         1974     1.100     1.032   0.631   0.884    1.024         1.189         1.000
     UK         1975     0.476    0.667    0.319   0.725    1.381         0.935         0.726
     UK         197€     2.000    0.462    0.292   0.587    1.475         0.900         0.214
     UK         1977     3.095    0.436    0.502    0.421   0.926         1.089         0.212

     IT         1974     1.000     1.000   0.496    0.729   0.800         1.130         1.000
     IT         1975     1.000    0.602    0.332    0.614   0.779         1.215         0.795
     IT         1976     Large    0.575    0.350    0.581   0.702         1.173         0.575
     IT         1977     Large    0.449    0.295    0.507   0.817         1.257         0.504

     CA         1974     1.000     1.000   1.000    1.000   0.500         1.000         1.030
     CA         1975     1.386    0.596    0.596    0.596   0.838         0.756         1.109
     CA         1976     1.000    0.443    0.670    0.602   0.711         0.831         1.321
     CA         1977     1.134    0.276    1.000    0.545   0.381         0.505         1.740

   From Amano et al (1982).    See footnote to Table 3.4.
                                      Table 3.4
           Impact of increased autonomous expenditure in the Japanese EPA
              World Economic Model.  I
                                     Impacts are presented2 as per cent
         difference from control for a one per cent increase in expenditure

                            (Endogenous exchange rates.)
Increase in                                       Impact on PA
Expenditure       Year                                  in
    In                      US       JA       t3E      FR      UK       IT      CA
   Us             1974     0.024    0.061    0.024    0.024    0.085   0.085   0.024
   us             1975    -0.098 0.245 0.257 -0.000 0.527              0.747   0.208
   Us             1976    -0.116    0.541    0.812    0.606    0.877   1.67€   0.593
   Us             1977     0.121    1.172    1.751    1.131    0.391   3.341   0.943
   JA             1974    0.019 -0.065 0.000 -0.000 0.019              0.019   0.009
   JA             1975    0.057 0.085 0.009 -0.019 0.132               0.066   0.057
   %JA            1976    0.070 0.609 0.010 -0.030 0.220               0.040   0.110
   JA             1977    0.032 1.710 0.011 -0.053 0.095               0.021   0.116
   GE             1974    0.037 0.007        0.060 -0.060 0.060 0.037 0.022
   GE             1975    0.067 -0.097       0.425 -0.231 0.209 0.052 0.060
   GE             1976    0.084 -0.353       1.089 -0.261     0.115    0.353   0.092
   GE             1977    0.080    -0.689 1.868 -0.240        -0.248   0.890   0.088
   FR             1974   -0.008 -0.008 -0.000        -0.134    0.008 -0.034 -0.008
   FR             1975   -0.008 -0.034 -0.017        -0.252    0.017 -0.008 -0.008
   FR             197€    0.026 -0.052 -0.026        -0.428    0.035 0.122 0.026
   FR             1977    0.037 -0.147 -0.028        -0.111   -0.000 0.046 0.046
   UK            1974     0.021 -0000 0.000 -0.032 0.368               0.032   0.011
   UK            1975     0.021 -0.072 -0.000 -0.113 1.471             0.021   0.021
   UK            1976    -0.022 -0.209 -0.022 -0.110 3.824             0.044   0.022
   UK            1977     0.000 -0.258 -0.032 -0.043 6.794             0.333   0.022
   IT            1974     0.017    -0.000   -0.000   -0.085   0.017 0.734      0.000
   II            1975     0.016    -0.050   -0.016   -0.149   0.066 2.116      0.017
   IT            1976     0.034    -0.154   -0.034   -0.120   0.051 3.498      0.034
   IT            1977     0.035    -0.278   -0.052   -0.122   0.000 4.814      0.035
   CA            1974    -0.011 -0.000 0.000 -0.000 0.000 0.000 0.528
   CA            1975     0.000 -0.011 0.000 -0.011 0.023 0.045 l.6&2
   CA            1976     0.023 -0.035 0.024 0.000 0.083 0.106 2.842
   CA            1977     0.012 -0.085
                       (Exogenous exchange rates.)

Increase in                              Impact on PA
Expenditure   Year                             in
    in               US       UA      GE      FR      UK       IT      CA

   US         1974   0.073   0.012   0.000   -0.000 0.049     0.024   0.109
    US        1975   0.000   0.037   0.037   -0.025 0.319     0.061   0.417
    US        1976   0.206   0.103   0.116   -0.064 0.748     0.103   0.864
    US        1977   0.795   0.148   0.216   -0.054   1.266   0.175   1.320

    JA        1974   0.009 0.084 0.000 0.000 0.009            0.009   0.009
    UA        1975   0.047 0.236 0.019 -0.000 0.094           0.047   0.076
    JA        1976   0.070 0.120 0.060 -0.010 0.240           0.070   0.160
    JA        1977   0.084 -0.275 0.095 -0.021 0.370          0.063   0.211

    GE        1974   0.015   0.015   0.082 -0.015 0.037       0.030   0.015
    GE        1975   0.052   0.045   0.462 -0.082 0.223       0.097   0.074
    GE        1976   0.100   0.084   0.889 -0.130 0.491       0.138   0.169
    GE        1977   0.120   0.112   1.138 -0.088 0.705       0.153   0.248

    FR        1974   0.000   0.000   0.000   -0.243   0.008 -0.000    0.000
    FR        1975   0.017   0.008   0.025   -0.562   0.092 0.000     0.017
    FR        1976   0.035   0.026   0.079   -0.586   0.245 0.017     0.061
    FR        1977   0.046   0.034   0.138   -0.332   0.359 0.018     0.101

    UK        1974   0.011   0.011   0.000 -0.011     0.378   0.011   0.011
    UK        1975   0.031   0.021   0.031 -C).041    1.029   0.041   0.062
    UK        1976   0.055   0.055   0.088 -0.066     1.278   0.055   0.132
    UK        1977   0.075   0.065   0.129 -0.043     1.688   0.065   0.172

    IT        1974   0.017   0.017   0.000   -0.017   0.017   0.085   0.017
    IT        1975   0.033   0.033   0.050   -0.066   0.116   0.182   0.050
    IT        1976   0.051   0.051   0.120   -0.086   0.240   0.326   0.103
    IT        1977   0.070   0.070   0.174   -0.070   0.365   0.556   0.156

    CA        1974   0.011   0.000   0.000 0.000 0.011        0.000 0.404
    CA        1975   0.045   0.023   0.011 0.000 0.057        0.034 1.243
    CA        1976   0.094   0.047   0.035 -0.000 0.142       0.059 1.757
    CA        1977   0.122   0.061   0.061 -0.000 0.244       0.073 1.863
                          (Endogenous    exchange rates.)
Increase in                                  Impact on FXS
Expenditure    Year                               in
    in

    US         1974    -0.776    0.412    2.596   0.898    0.946
                                                             0.995 -0.340
    US         l975    -1.997    1.176    6.960   '1.703   1.715
                                                             4.607 -0.417
    US         1976    -5.620    2.655 15.636 12.684 0.825 10.389 1.353
    US         1977    -8.998    6.021 29.755 17.390 -0.687 18.993 0.674

    JA         1974     0.205 -0.626 -0.168 -0.093 0.065 0.000 -0.075
    JA         1975     0.274 -0.245 -0.557 -0.330 -0.057 -0.085 -0.142
    JA         1976    -0.359  2.805 -0.399 -0.190 -0.699 -0.190 -0.120
    JA         1977    -1.710 8.573 0.348 -C).021 -0.940 0.053 -0.148
    GE         1974     0.328   -0.112 -0.887 -C).813 0.007 -0.224 -0.052
    GE         1975    -0.037   -0.700 2.287 -1,281 -0.655 -0.074 -0.142
    GE         1976    -0.598   -1.633 6.387 -0.337 -2.063 1.809 -0.153
    GE         1977    -1.339   -2.389 10.525 0.128 -1.683 4.361 -0.200
    FR         1974    -0.126 -0.017     -0.160   1.528 -0.000     0.025 -0.025
    FR         1975    -0.151 -0.084     -0.386   2.717 -0.361     0.403 -0.034
    FR         1976     0.262 -0.280     -0.787   0.723 -0.691     0.411 -0.026
    FR         1977     0.046 -0.617     -0.166   1.814 -0.507     0.322 -0.018

    UK         1974     0.147 -0.074 -0.347 -0.378         0.126 -0.032 -0.074
    UK         1975    -0.422 -0.391 -0.689 -0.535       5.567     0.021 -0.123
    UK         1976    -1.752 -0.771 -0.154       0.231 15.186     0.683 -0.066
    UK         1977    -1.290 -0.774 -0. 172      0.151 11.105     1.398 -0.043

    IT         1974     0.222   -0.051 -0.495 -0.632 -0.051 2.835          -0.051
    IT         1975     0.397   -0.281 -0.942 -0.512 -0.248 7.620          -0.083
    IT         1976     0.429   -0.669 -0.840 0.000 -0.583 10.718          -0.069
    IT         1977     0.556   -1.043 -0.904 -0.348 -0.382 13.364         -0.104
    CA         1974    -0.326   -0.011 0.011 -0.011 0.000          0.011   0.943
    CA         1975    -0.746   -0.079 0.023 -0.045 0.000          0.147    2.238
    CA         1976    -1.415   -0.259 0.142 0.130 -0.047          0.318    4.328
    CA         1977    -2.484   -0.390 0.560 0.280 -0.134          0.499    7.330
  Calculated from data in Amano et al, (1982).
  Actual shocks were a sustained increase in real government non-wage
expenditure in the U.S. of $10 billion, a sustained increase
in real government expenditure in West Germany
of 10 billion DM, a sustained increase in real
government gross fixed investment in Japan of      1
                                                trillion yen,
an increase in the U.K. of general gross fixed capital formation
by I bIllion pounds, increases In Italy of
government expenditure and the constant term
of the fixed investment equation by 700 bIllion lire.
and an increase in Canada of government
fixed Investment by $1 billion.
                               Table 3.5
    Impact of fiscal policy in linked RDX2 - MPS system.  Sustained
cut equal to 1% of 1963 GNP. Impacts given as per cent difference from
                               control
                         Shock starts in 1963.

               (Flexible exchange rate, fixed money supplies.)

                          Impact on           Impact on          Impact on     Impact on
 Decreased                  GNP1                PGNP                 PS3          FXS
expenditure                   in                  in                 in
      in        Year       US    CA            US    CA           US     CA

     US         1964      1.97 -0.16         -0.21       0.01    -0.29 -0.02   -0.37
     us         1966      0.88        0.22   -1.08 -0.20         -0.32 -0.03   -0.35

     CA          1964    -0.06        0.83   -0.00 -0.61         -0.01 -0.55       1.23
     CA          1966    -0.10        0.58   -0.04 -1.06         -0.02 -0.60       1.27



                        (Fixed exchange rate,            fixed money supplies.)

                          Impact on           Impact on           Impact on
 Decreased                  GNP                 PGNP                  RS
expenditure                      In                 in                in
      in        Year       US          CA      US         CA       US    CA

     US          1964     2.03 -0.15         -0.21       0.02    -0.29 -0.02
     US          1966     0.93 0.28          -1.08       -0.11   -0.32 -0.01

     CA          1964    -0.04        0.89    0.00 -0.66         -0.01 -0.52
     CA          1966    -0.09        0.80   -0.02       -1.37   -0.02 -0.69



              (Flexible exchange rate, fixed short-term interest rates.)

                           Impact on          Impact on           Impact on       Impact on
 Decreased                   (3NP               PGNP                  Ml             FXS
expenditure                      in                                   in
      in         Year       US         CA      US          CA      US    CA

      US         1964      2.47 -0.27        -0.21 -0.00         -1.62 -0.18      0.05
      US         1966      2.43 -0.11        -1.28-0.19          -2.70-0.31       0.20

      CA         1964     -0.13       2.02   -0.00 -0.99         -0.07 -2.99      -0.31
      CA         1966     -0.16       2.69   -0.07       -2.00   -0.16 -4.47      -0.88

    From Helliwell (1974), 259-261, and Helliwell and McRae (977), 174-175.
2
    Percent of 1963 GNP
    Percentage points.
                                       Table 4.1
           Impact of a one percentage point increase in discount rate in the
                          Japanese EPA World Economic Model
          Impacts are presented as per cent difference from control solution.

                             (Endogenous exchange rates.)
Increase in                                     Impact on GNP
Interest rate     Year                                in
    in                       US      JA      GE      FR     UK       IT      CA

    US             1974    -0.36   -0.03   0.24    -0.02   -0.01   -0.01   -0.13
    US             1975    -0.68   -0.10   0.22    -0.11   -0.15   -0.00   -0.38
    US             1976    -0.51   -0.14   0.06    -0.04   -0.17   -0.14   -043
    US             1977    -0.14   -0.13   -0.15   -0.12   -0.06   -0.21   -0.40
    JA             1974    0.01    -0.08   0.01    0.00    -0.01    0.01   0.01
    JA             1975    0.01    -0.20   0.02    0.02    -0.01    0.01   0.02
    JA             1976    0.01    -0.31   0.03    0.03    -0.01   0.02    0.03
    1JA            1977    0.02    -0.39   0.04    0.06    -0.01    0.03   0.05
   GE              1974    -0.00   0.00    -0.54   -0.11   -0.03   -0.02    0.01
   GE              1975    -0.03   -0.04   -1.29   -0.42   -0.22   -0.22   -0.03
   GE              1976    -0.04   -0.09   -2.01   -0.77   -0.30   -0.42   -0.07
   GE              1977    -0.05   -0.11   -2.31   -0.72   -0.40   -0.61   -0.08
    FR             1974    -0.00    0.00    0.01   -0.21   -0.01    0.01   0.01
    FR             1975    -0.01   -0.00   -0.01   -0.48   -0.03   -0.02   0.00
    FR             1976    -0.01    0.01    0.01   -0.69   -0.03   -0.01   0.01
    FR             1977    0.00    -0.01   -0.01   -0.52   -0.03   -0.03   0.01

   UK              1974    0.01    0.01    0.02    0.01    -0.14   0.03    0.01
   UK              1975    0.00    0.01    0.01    0.02    -0.08   0.01    0.02
   UK              1976    0.01    0.02    0.02    0.05     0.08   0.00    0.04
   UK              1977    0.03    0.01    0.02    0.05    -0.07   0.03    0.04
    IT             1974    -0.01   0.00     0.01   0.01    -0.00   0.16    0.00
    IT             1975    -0.03    0.01   -0.00   0.03    -0.02   -0.41   0.01
    IT             1976    -0.05    0.01   -0.02   0.04    -0.03   -0.40   0.01
    IT             1977    -0.05   -0.01   -0.02   0.03    -0.02   -0.24   0.02

   CA              1974    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00     0.00
   CA              1975    0.01    0.00    0.01    0.00    0.00    0.01    -0.05
   CA              1976    -0.00   0.01    0.02    0.01     0.01   0.02    -0.49
   CA              1977    0.01    0.01    0.02    0.01    -0.01   0.01    -0.87
                           (Exogenous exchange rates.)

Increase in                                 Impact on GNP
Interest rate    Year                               in
    in                   US       JA     GE      FR     UK         IT     CA

   US           1974    -0.39   -0.03   -0.02   -0.02    -0.0€   -0.02
   US           1975    -0.75   -0.11   -0.07   -0.09    -0.19   -0.06   -0.40
   US           1976    -0.60   -0.16   -0.11   -0.13    -0.17   -0.09   -0.37
   US           1977    -0.20   -0.17   -0.10   -0.11    -0.09   -0.10   -0.33

    JA          1974    0.01    -0.04   -0.00   -0.00    -0.00   -0.00   0.00
    JA          1975    0.02    -0.12   -0.01   -0.01    -0.01   -0.00   -0.00
    JA          1976    0.02    -0.19   -0,01   -0.01    -0.01   -0.01   -0.00
    JA          1977    0.02    -0.24   -0.01   -0.01    -0.02   -0.01   -0.01

    GE          1974    0.01    -001    -0.27   -0.11    -0.03   -0.03   -0.01
    GE          1975    0.02    -0.05   -0.81   -0.47    -0.16   -0.19   -0.04
    GE          197€    0.04    -0.12   -1.14   -0.78    -0.25   -0.36   -0.09
    GE          1977    0.05    -0.18   -1.14   -0.76    -0.26   -0.46   -0.12

    FR          1974     0.01   -0.00   -0.01   -0.16    -0.01   -0.01    0.00
    FR          1975     0.01   -0.01   -0.03   -0.41    -0.02   -0.02   -0.00
    FR          1976     0.02   -0.01   -0.05   -0.52    -0.04   -0.04   -0.01
    FR          1977     0.02   -0.02   -0.05   -C).44   -0.04   -0.05   -0.01

    UK          1974     0.01    0.00   -0.00   -0.00    -0.06   -0.00    0.00
    UK          1975     0.02   -0.00   -0.01   -0.02    -0.04   -0.01    0.00
    UK          1976     0.03   -0.00   -0.01   -0.01     0.03   -0.01    0.01
    UK          1977     0.03    0.00    0.00   -0.00    -0.03   -0.00    0.02

    IT          1974    -0.00   -0.00   -0.01   -0.01    -0.01   -0.06   -0.00
    IT          1975    -0.00   -0.01   -0.04   -0.05    -0.02   -0.18   -0.01
    IT          1976    -0.00   -0.02   -0.06   -0.08    -0.03   -0.24   -0.02
    IT          1977    -0.00   -0.02   -0.06   -0.08    -0.03   -0.14   -0.02

    CA          1974     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
    CA          1975     0.00    0.00   -0.00   -0.00    -0.00    0.00   -0.01
    CA          1976     0.01   -0.01   -0.01   -0.01    -0.01   -0.01   -0.45
    CA          1977     0.01   -0.02   -0.02   -0.02    -0.02   -0.02   -0.35
                           (Endogenous exchange rates.)
Increase in                                     Impact on PA
Interest rate     Year                                 in
    In                     US      JA      GE        F         UK     IT      CA
   US           1974     -0.08    0.13    0.04     0.05     0.01     0.12   —0.02
   US           1975     -0.12    0.38    0.18     0.04     0.06     0.55   -0.16
   US           1976     -0.31    0.61    0.28     0.18    -0.09     0.54   -0.37
   US           1977     -0.47    0.84    0.26     0.01    —0.29     0.39   -0.48
   UA           1974     0.01    -0.28    0.00     0.01     0.01     0.01    0.01
   JA           1975     0.02    -0.76    0.00     0.01     0.03     0.02    0.01
   iA           1976     0.03    -1.27   -0.00     0.01     0.08     0.01    0.02
   JA           1977     0.04    -1.74   -0.01     0.<)2    0.12     0.00    0.02
   GE           1974     0.03     0.02   -0.05     0.01     0.03     0.02    0.02
   GE           1975     0.02     0.02   -0.39     0.12     0.05    -0.13    0.02
   GE           1976     0.03     0.08   -0.79     0.18     0.08    -0.25    0.01
   GE           1977     0.06     0.23   -1.31     0.31     0.25    -0.57    0.00
   FR           1974     0.01     0.01    0.00    -0.09     0.01     0.03    0.01
   FR           1975     0.01    -0.01    0.01    -0.04     0.03    -0.03    0.01
   FR           1976     0.03    -0.01    0.01    -0.11     0.04     0.00    0.02
   FR           1977     0.04    -0.02   0.01     -0.01     0.07    -0.07    0.03
   UK           1974     0.02     0.01   0.00      0.01    -0.13    0.08     0.01
   UK           1975     0.03    -0.00   0.01      0.02    -0.70    0.12     0.03
   UK           1976     0.04    -0.05   0.01      0.01    -1.21    0.06     0.03
   UK           1977     0.03    —0.10   0.01     -0.01    -1.33    0.05     0.04
   IT           1974     0.01     0.01   0.00      0.01    0.01     -0.36    0.01
   IT           1975     0.02     0.02   0.01      0.03    0.04     -1.26    0.02
   IT           1976     0.05    -0.01   0.01      0.02    0.08     -1.89    0.04
   IT           1977     0.06    -0.07   0.01      0.02    0.08     -1.91    0.04
   CA           1974     0.00     0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00     0.00
   CA           1975     0.01     0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00     0.01    -0.06
   CA           1976     0.04    -0.01   0.00     -0.00    0.02     0.06    -0.41
   CA           1977     0.03
                           (Exogenous exchange rates.)
Increase in                                 Impact on PA
Interest rate    Year                               in
    in                   US       JA     GE      FR      UK       IT     CA

   Us           1974    -0.02   -0.01   -0.00   0.00    -0.02   -0:01   -0.02
   Us           1975    -0.05   -0.01   -0.01   0.01    -0.10   -0.02   -0.14
   Us           1976    —0.22   -0.04   -0.03   0.01    -0.23   -0.05   -0.31
   Us           1977    -0.37   -0.06   -0.06   -0.00   -0.33   -0.08   -0.39

    JA          1974    -0.00   -0.01   -0.00   -0.00   -0.00   -0.00   0.00
    JA          1975    -0.00   -0.02   -0.00   -0.00   -0.00   -0.00   -0.00
    JA          1976     0.00   -0.03   -0.00    0.00   -0.01   -0.01   -0.01
    JA          1977     0.01   -0.04   -0.01    0.00   -0.02   -0.01   -0.01

    GE          1974    -0.00   -0.00   -0.02   0.01    -0.01   -0.01   -0.00
    GE          1975    -0.02   -0.02   -0.15   0.05    -0.07   -0.04   -0.02
    GE          1976    -0.05   -0.04   -0.36    0.12   -0.23   -0.07   -0.07
    GE          1977    -0.06   -0.06   -0.55    0.13   -0.40   -0.09   -0.12

    FR          1974     0.00   -0.00   -0.00    0.01   -0.00   -0.00    0.00
    FR          1975    -0.00   -0.00   -0.00    0.05   —0.01   -0.00   -0.00
    FR          1976    -0.00   -0.01   -0.01    0.08   -0.03   -0.01   -0.01
    FR          1977    -0.00   -0.01   -0.02    0.07   -0.05   -0.01   -0.01

    UK          1974     0.00    0.00   -0.00    0.00   -0.01   -0.00    0.00
    UK          1975     0.00   -0.00   -0.00    0.00   -0.05   -0.00    0.00
    UK          1976     0.01   -0.00   -0.01    0.01   -0.04   -0.00    0.00
    UK          1977     0.01   -0.00   -0.01    0.00   -0.04    0.00    0.01

    II          1974    -0.00   -0.00   -0.00    0.00   -0.00   -0.01   -0.00
    IT          1975    -0.01   -0.00   -0.01    0.01   -0.01   -0.02   -0.01
    IT          1976    -0.01   -0.01   -0.01    0.02   -0.03   -0.03   -0.01
    IT          1977    -0.01   -0.01   -0.03    0.02   -0.05   -0.04   -0.02

    CA          1974     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
    CA          1975     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   -0.00    0.00    0.01
    CA          1976    -0.01   -0.00   -0.00   -0.00   -0.01   -0.00   -0.10
    CA          1977    -0.01   -0.01   -0.01   -0.00   -0.02   -0.01   -0.27
                           (Endogenous   exchange rates.)
Increase in                                   Impact on FXS
Interest rate     Year                                in
    in                     US      UA      GE      FR     UK          IT      CA
    US          1974     -1.03    0.75    2.63    1.10     0.85      1 25    0.19
    US          1975     -1.08    1.63    2.49    0.63     0.82      2.80    0.03
    US          1976     -1.23    2.38    2.19    2.34     0.05      2.25   -0.06
    US          1977     -0.74    2.90    0.94    0.69     0.23      0.84   -0.10
    iA          1974     0.28    -1.18   -0.10    0.03     0.03      0.01   -0.01
    tJA         1975     0.66    -2.71   -0.22   -0.06     0   13   -0.05   -0.02
    2JA         1976     0.97    -4.00   -0.30   -0.03     0.20     -0.10   -0.02
    2J4         1977      1.31   -5.09   -0.47   -0.03     0.12     -0.15   -0.03
    GE          1974     0.51    -0.02   -2.08   -0.36     0.08     -0.29   -0.00
    GE          1975     0.60     0.01   -3.17    0.39     0.38     -0.80    0.06
    GE          1976      1.01    0.33   -5.34   -0.33     1.28     -1.49    0.09
    GE          1977      1.45    0.83   -7.79    0.56     1.19     -2.93    0.09
    FR          1974     0.15    -0.01   -0.10   -1.08     0.02     -0.09   -0.00
    FR          1975     0.08    -0.06   -0.04   -0.46     0.01     -0.22   -0.01
    FR          1976     0.26    -0.12   -0.16   -1.79     0.11     -0.29    0.01
    FR          1977     0.03    -0.20    0.02   -0.02     0.08     -0.34    0.02
    UK          1974     0.27    -0.01   -0.11   -0.01    -1.63      0.20   -0.01
    UK          1975     0.55    -0.11   -0.22   -0.06    -3.12      0.12   -0.02
    UK          1976     0.54    -0.27   -0.18   -0.12    -2.76     -0.13   -0.04
    UK          1977     0.30    -0.41   -0.04    0.04    -1.28      0.06   -0.05
    IT          1974     0.01     0.02   -0.04    0.02     0.01     -1.64    0.00
    IT          1975     0.05    -0.03   -0.19   -C).06    0.03     -5.00   -0.00
    IT          1976     0.14    -0.19   -0.30   -0.23    —0.01     -5.94   -0.01
    IT          1977     0.18    -0.41   -0.26   -0.10    -0.05     -4.90   -0.04
    CA          1974     0.00     0.00   0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00
    CA          1975     0.18    -0.00   0.01    -0.01    -0.01     0.05    -0.50
    CA          1976     0.75    -0.06   -0.01   -0.03     0.08     0.20    -2.08
    CA          1977     0.86    -0.12   0.08     0.04     0.03     0.18    -2.38
width of text is 70 characters   Calculated from data in Aman
2
  For the U.S., U.K., Germany and dapan, the discount rates w
Increased; In France, the call money rate, in Italy, the trea
rate. In Canada. Ml was reduced appropriately.
                         Table 4.2
Impacts of a co-ordinated 1 per cent cut in interest rates
as simulated by LINK' and the Multi-Country Model.2 Impacts
are presented as per cent difference from control solution.


                                   Impact on income
  Model        Year                      in
                        US      JA      GE     UK      CA

    LINK       1980    0.3    0.4     0.5    0.1      0.2
               1981    0.6    0.4     1.0    0.3      0.4
               1982    0.7    0.6     1.2    0.2      0.8
               1983    0.7    0.6     1.5    0.1      0.7

    MCM        1975     0.2   0.2     0.2    0.1      0.1
               1976     0.7    0.5    0.5    0.2      0.5
               1977     0.6    0.6    0.7    0.2      0.7
               1978     0.4    0.6    0.6    0.1      0.7

                            Impact on price level
  Model        Year                    in
                         US     JA     GE     UK      'CA

    LINK       1980     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0
               1981    -0.3    0.1    0.0     0.0     0.0
               1982    -0.3    0.3    0.1     C).l    0.2
               1983    -0.6    0.3    0.1     0.2     0.4

    MCM        1975     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0
               1976     0.0    0.1    0.1     0.0     0.1
               1977     0.0    0.1    0.2     C).1    0.4
               1978     0.1    0.2    0.4     0.2     0.6

  From data in Klein, Simes and Voisin (1981). Simulated
shock was a 2 per cent cut, so we have scaled the impacts by
.5. Exchange rates are exogenous, and in the case of tiapan
and some other countries not shown, investment was shocked
directly by I per cent In the first year, 2 per cent in the
second and 3 per cent in the last two years.
2
  From a simulation provided for this study. Exchange rates
are endogenous. The shock was a monetary contraction, so we
have reversed the signs of the impacts. The shock was
administered through the central bank discount rate and
standardized across countries to yield approximately one per
centage point change In short term Interest rates at the
outset.
                               Table 4.3
Comparison of the effects of isolated and coordinated monetary policy
 as simulated by LINK' and MCM'. The tabulated
                                                figures are ratios of
the percent change- in price level to the percent
                                                  change in income in
                                                          cost of the
the fourth year of the shock, a measure of the inflation
          induced output. (In no case did output decrease.)


                               Price/output ratio
                                       In
                         US     JA     GE     UK     CA
    LINK (isolated)    -0.9    0.4   -0.0    0.1    0.5
    LINK (coordinated) -0.9    0.5    0.0    0.4    0.5
    MCM (isolated)      1.0    0.3    0.9   LARGE   1.1
    MCM (coordinated)   0.3    0.3    0.7    2.0    0.9
  Calculated from data in Klein, Simes and Voisin (1981). See notes to
Table 4.2.
2
  Calculated from data In a simulation provided for this study. See
notes to Table 4.2.
                                                              Table 5.1
                                 Impact of an oil price shock according to four models.
                               Impacts are presented as per cent difference from control,
                                            in the second year of the shock.

10% oil   price
  lncrmase                       Impact on GNP                                        Impact on PGNP
  modelled                             in                                                   in
          Year      US    JA       GE    FR    UK        IT     CA        US   JA       GE    FR    UK       IT     CA
     by
 Fair'      1977 -0.23   0.08 -0.10      0.19 -0.14     0.10 -0.22     0.59    0.58   0.02    0.38   0.26   1.01   0.22

            1975 -0.64 -0.62     -0.19 -0.29 -0.47 -0.44 -0.06         0.32    2.59     .10   0.36   0.84   1.56   0.31
  EPA2

  EPA       1975 -0.66 -0.78 -0.07 -0.21        -0.49 -0.44 -0.02      0.37    1.35   0.13    0.39   0.60   0.99   0.34

  MCM1      1980 -0.21 -0.56 -0.09              -0.18          -0.05   0.39    1.32   0.43           0.24          0.15

                                 -1.46   -0.17 -0.46 -0.33                            0.20    0.03   1.00 -0.38
Eurollnk5   19811



10% oIl price
  Increase                       Impact on FXS
  modelled                               in
     by   Year      US    JA       GE      FR     UK     IT      CA

  EPA       1975 -1.20   5.08 -0.07 -0.43        1.33   1.89    0.00

  MCM       1980 -0.91   2.62     0.41          -0.2C           0.04

  Calculated from data in Fair (1982), Table 10. A 50 per cent price shock was
simulated, so we have scaled down Fair's Impacts by 5.
2 From Amano et al (1982), With endogenous exchange rate.

  From Amano et al (1982), with exogenous exchange rate.
  Calculated from data in Hooper and Tryon (1982), Tables 7 to Ii. Estimated historical
patterns for OPEC absorption and investment. Their price shock was
100 per cent of the base, so we have scaled their impacts down by 10.
  Simulation provided for this survey. The shock was a 25 per cent price
Increase, so impacts have been scaled down by 2.5.
                                          Table 5.2
Impact of a 10 per cent oil price increase with the dapanese EPA model.
The Impacts are presented as per cent difference from control solution.

                             (Endogenous exchange rates)

                                      Impact on GNP
   Year                                     in
               US            UA      GE     FR      UK             IT       CA

   1974     -0.22   -0.23          0.01    -0.09    -0.17        0.03     0.05
   1975     -0.64   -0.62         -0.19    -029     -0.47       -0.44    -0.06
   1976     -0.85   -0.69         -0.39    -0.53    -0.50       -0.85    -0.27
   1977     -0.85   -0.60         -0.55    -0.54    -0.39       —1.03    -0.42


                             (Exogenous exchange rates)

                                      Impact on GNP
  Year                                      in
               US            JA      GE     FR     UK              IT       CA

   1974     -0.23   -0.27          0.05    -0.10    -0.23       -0.03    0.07
   1975     -0.66   -0.78         -0.07    -0.21    -0.49       -0.44    -0.02
   1976     -0.81   -1 .03        -0.22    -0.25    -0.46       -0.70    -0.16
   1977     -0.79   -1 .08        -0.23    -0.22    -0.43       -0.82    -0.24


                             (Endogenous exchange rates)

                                      Impact on PA
  Year                                      in
               US            JA      GE     FR     UK              IT       CA

   1974     0.26     I   .   36   0.03      0.31      0.26        .06    0.19
   1975     0.32     2 .59        0.10      0.36      0.84        .56    0.31
   1976     0.33     3 . 95       0.12      0. 33     1.04       1.45    0.30
   1977     0.32    5 .42         0.07      0 37      1   .06    1. 17   0.21


                             (Exogenous exchange rates)
                                      Impact on PA
  Year                                      in
              US             iA      GE     FR     UK              IT      CA
  1974      0.29     1.08         0.03      0.27      0.25      0.77     0.20
  1975      0.37     1.35         0.13      0.34      0.60      0.99     0.34
  1976      0.38     1.30         0.18      0.41      0.63       1.09    0.37
  1977      0.45     1.31         0.17      0.41      0.55       1.18    0.36
                   (Endogenous exchange rates)

                             Impact on FXS
Year                               in
           US     iA        GE     FR      UK      IT      CA

1974    -0.53   1.41     0.21    0.54   0.81     1.51   0.01
1975    -1.20   5.08    -0.07   -0.43   1.33     1.89    0.00
1976    -1.95   9.65    -0.07   -1.20   1.10    0.32    -0.15
1977    -2.58   13.67   -0.86   -0.80   1.18    -1.11   -0.30


From Amano et al. (1982).
                                                                     Table 5.3
                                      Impacts of oil price shocks calculated by LINK.'
                        Inipacts2,    are presented as per cent shock minus control over control,
                                          or, where indicated, in billions of $US.

                                 Impact on GDP                                                 Impact on PGDP
                                       in
Year        US     JA       GE     FR    UK    IT               CA    OECD        US      JA     GE     FR      UK     IT    CA

1978      -0.4   -2.3     -0.8   -0.6     -0.4      -0.6      0.0    S-lOb       0.0     1.0   -03     1.6   0.4     -0.1   0.5
1979      -0.5   -4.0     -1.1   -0.9     -0.5      -0.8      -0.1   $-32b       0.0     1.1   -0.7    1.9    1.2    -0.1   0.9

1979                                                                 -0.5
1980                                                                 -0.9
1981                                                                 -1.4
1982                                                                 -1.9


                                                             Table 5.3 (continued)

                                                                                                                                  Impact
                                 Impact         on PC                                    Impact on Trade Balance                  on
                                          in                                                      in                              World
Year        US     JA       GE       FR        UK       IT      CA    OECD        US       JA    GE    FR    UK        IT    CA   Price

1978       0.2    6.6      ---    1.9      0.6       0.4      0.3      1.1        -6.7   -6.0 -l 6    -1.9   -0.2    -1.2   0.2     44
1979       0.2    6.0      ---    2.3      1.2       0.6      0.7      1.1       -15.5 -13.0 -4.2     -4.3    0.1    -2.3   0.1     2.1

1979                                                                  0.3                                                           1.8
1980                                                                  0.6                                                           2.7
1981                                                                   1.1                                                          4.4
1982                                                                   1.5                                                          4.4
  The 1978-79 simulation is from Klein (1978), Table 2, and the 1979-82
simulation is from ilatov, Hickman and Klein (1982), Table 6.
2
  In the 1978-1979 sImulation, the shock is an oil price increase of $2 per
barrel over control in the first year and $4 per barrel over control in the
second year.
  In the 1979-82 simulation, the shock is an oil price increase over control of
8.5 per cent in the first year, an additional 3.2 per cent In the second years,
an additional 6.5 per cent in the third, and an additional 5.2 per cent in the
fourth.
                                                        Table 5.4
                                    Impact of an oil price shock in the Fair model.1
                                Impacts are presented as percent difference from control.


                         Impact on GNP                                        Impact on PGNP
                               in                                                   in
    Year    US     UA      GE     FR   UK       IT      CA       US     JA      GE     FR   UK       IT    CA

197611     -0.30   0.03 -0.40    0.47 -0.30 -0.24      -0.19    1.22   0.81   0.10   0.46   0.32    1.33   0.33
197711     -1.16   0.41 -0.51    0.94 -0.71 0.51       -1.12    2.96   2.91   0.08   1.89   1.30    5.06   1.10

                                                      Table 5.4 (continued)

                         Impact on RS                                         Impact on FXS
                                in                                                   in
    Year    US      JA    GE         FR   UK    IT       CA      US     JA      GE     FR   UK       IT    CA

197611     0.25    1.91 -0.02    0.91 -0.01    2.44    0.44      ---   1.47 -1.47   -1.69 -0.94    -0.40 -0.16
1977II     0.02    2.39 -0.21    0.79 -0.12    2.31    0.80      ---   5.05   -6.30 -5.26 -5.51    -1.60 -0.71
I
  From Fair (l982), Table 10. The shock is a sustained 50% increase in
the price of exports from the oil exporting countries, beginning in
19761.
                                Table 5.5
          Impact of an oil price shock in the Eurolink model.'
        Impacts are presented as percent difference From control


                  Impact on GNP                   Impact on PGNP
                        in                              in
 Year     GE       FR      UK       IT     GE      FR     UK     IT

1980     -2.03    0.07    -0. 19    0.33   0.18   -0.83   0.73         -I   .   34
1981     -3.66    -0.43   -1.14    -0.83   0.49   0.08    2   .   50   -0.95
1982     -3.41    -0.99     .
                          - I 36   -1.13   0.27   1.21    3.72         -0.01
1983          .   -0.85     .                     2 .04   4.41          0.12
         - I 75           - I 20   -1.14   0.18



                  Impact on PC                    Impact on PS
                        in                              in
 Year     GE       FR      UK       IT     GE      FR     UK            IT

1980      0.63    0.54    0.61     -0.50          3.07                 0.78
1981       1.35   1.64     1.80    -0.13          6.13                 0.84
1982       1.52   2.49     2.45     0.73          6.92                 2.76
1983       1.66   3.18     2.83     0.86          8.78                 1.84

  Simulation provided for this survey. In the simulation. Rest of
World Is exogenous, and in the shock mode, the Rest of World oil price
(SITC 3) Is increased by 25 per cent throughout the period of the
simulation.
