                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT
                      AND INTERPRETATION OF
                       EFFECTIVE TAX RATES




                          David Bradford

                          Charles Stuart




                      Working Paper No. 1975




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 1986




Ideas here do not necessarily ref lect CEA views. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation
and project in Government Budgets. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  Working Paper #1975
                                                  July 1986




      Issues in the Measurement and Interpretation of Effective Tax Rates




                                     ABSTRACT



           Marginal effective tax rates on investment that are derived from

      the user cost of capital are nowadays widely used practically to assess

      the effects of capital taxation. In this paper, we examine several

      troublesome issues in the construction and use of marginal effective

      tax rates and user costs of capital. Our connnents fall into two

      classes. In the first are concerns about the adequacy of the current

      generation of models of capital—market equilibrium, into which marginal

      effective tax rates (user costs) are incorporated. In the second are

      concerns about the appropriateness of the assumption, implicit and

      nearly universal in marginal effective tax rate calculations, that

      investors   expect a given tax code to remain unchanged forever. We
      show that effects of current changes in the law on expectations about
      future changes may undo or even reverse the effects predicted by
      traditionally calculated effective tax rates.




David F. Bradford                                 Charles Stuart
Woodrow Wilson School                             Nationalekonomiska Institut
Princeton University                              Box 5137
Princeton, NJ 08544                               220 05 LUND 5 SWEDEN
       Marginal effect tax rates on investment that are derived
from the user cost of capital are nowadays widely used

practically to assess the effects of capital taxation. In this
paper, we examine several troublesome issues in the
construction and use of marginal effective tax rates and user
costs of capital. Our purpose is primarily to stimulate
discussion and thought and not to provide a comprehensive

survey. Our comments fall into two classes. In the first are
concerns about the adequacy of the current generation of models

of capital—market equilibrium, into which marginal effective    -



tax   rates (user Costs) are incorporated. In the second are
concerns about the appropriateness of the assumption, implicit
and nearly universal in marginal effective rate calculations,
that investors expect a given tax code to remain unchanged
forever. Because the actual tax code in the U.S. (and in most
developed countries) has been modified repeatedly in important
ways in recent years, this assumption is clearly suspect. We
argue that when changes in tax policy generate large effective
transfers of wealth, as is the case with nearly any important

tax change, employment of marginal effective tax rates can be
severely misleading. When such transfers exist, it is also
necessary to consider how the tax change affects expectations
about future policy. It is possible to find cases in which
these expectational effects undo or even reverse the effects
predicted by simple examination of traditionally calculated
marginal effective tax rates.
                               —2—

       In Section I, we review briefly just what is meant (here)
by a marginal effective tax rate. Section II then treats a
number of the technical issues in constructing and
incorporating effective rates into economic thinking. First,
the current state of knowledge does not provide a
satisfactorily precise understanding of the trade—offs that

firms face between debt and equity finance. Without a clear
picture of what determines the mix of debt and equity, it is

obviously difficult to predict the incentive effects of changes
in their tax treatments. Similar difficulties arise in
understanding incentive effects in an economy in which agents
with different tax situations specialize in investing and
holding different types of assets. A second problem is that a
number   of aspects of the tax code have yet to be incorporated
into   calculations of marginal effective rates. Third, both the
construction and use of effective rates are typically conducted
under the assumption that there are no capital flows between

countries, which appears to be problematic.
       The issue of wealth transfers induced by changes in tax
rules is treated in Section III. The essential point is that
if a policy change effectively causes wealth transfers then one
must take account of how the change affects expectations of
future policy—induced wealth transfers. This matters because
expectations of future shifts in policy influence an
investment's perceived pay—off and hence the incentive to
undertake it. In particular, if a policy shift today reduces
                               —3—

the value to investors of previously purchased investments,

incentives for future investment may fall. Because these
expectational effects are not included in traditional

effective—rate calculations, a policy change that reduces
calculated effective rates might in fact have little or even a
negative impact on the incentive to invest.


I. What is a Marginal Effective Tax Rate?

     A profit—maximizing firm will acquire capital up to the -
point   where an additional or marginal unit of investment no

longer yields any additional profit. To finance this marginal
investment, the firm obtains funds from savers either by

borrowing or by giving savers equity in the investment. In
order to pay savers the return they require to make funds
available and also to pay the government all taxes due on the
investment, the firm must earn a certain return net of actual
depreciation on the asset (referred to as the user cost of
capitalTM). In broad terms, a marginal effective tax is then
the difference between this return on the investment (the user
cost) and the return that must be paid to savers. It is
typically expressed as a rate by dividing it by the return to
savers (or sometimes by the return to investors).
    We intentionally refer to MaN marginal effective tax rate
here, because there often are many ways to specify the margin
for an increment of investment and saving. This means that
considerable care is required to apply or interpret marginal
                             —4—

effective tax rates.

     The notion of a marginal effective tax rate derives from

work by Hall and Jorgenson (1967). Technically, a marginal
effective tax is the difference between the internal rates of
return on two cash flows associated with an investment. The
first is the cash flow before tax rules have been applied, and
the second is the cash flow after taxes. To compute a margi   nal

effective rate, the analyst must first specify an exact
investment project (e.g., debt—financed construction of a
building owned by a household) and must then specify the
precise tax rules that the parties to the transaction

anticipate.


II. Technical Problems
     A. Financial Mix. Effective tax rates are often highly
sensitive to the choice of underlying assumptions. For
instance, table 1, from Fullerton (1985), reports effective tax

rates calculated using plausible assumptions about financing,
inflation, etc. under three different federal tax regimes for
investments in different aggregated asset types. The table
shows the consequences of varying two assumptions, one relating

to the way financial markets equilibrate (Nfirm arbitrage" vs.
"individual arbitrage") and one relating to the characteristics

of the underlying hypothetical projects (do they generate a
real after—tax rate of return of 5 percent or 3 percent to the
representative saver, s=.05 or s=.03). One sees from the table
                             —5—

that this range of assumptions implies marginal effective tax
rates on equipment in the corporate sector ranging from —58.7

percent to +4.6 percent under 1985 tax law. Needless to say,
this range is substantial.
     For our purposes, the more interesting of the two
sensitivity exercises in the Fullerton table is the one
relating to arbitrage and financial—market equilibrium. A
nagging problem confronted by the tax analyst is the lack of an
adequate model of financial markets. This is most evident in
the distinction, common in effective tax rate applications,
between rates on "debt—financed and "equity—financed"
investments. Fullerton deals with this by making a series of
fixed—proportion assumptions specifying the fraction of an
incremental investment financed by debt and the fraction
financed by equity. However, because firms can be presumed to
choose both real investment levels and modes of finance to
maximize profits, changes in tax law should induce changes in
both real investment and financial mix. In general, then, the

assumption of fixed financing proportions incorrectly
characterizes the market behavior of profit-maximizing firms.
     The individual arbitrage —   firm   arbitrage dichotomy gives
a further indication of the technical difficulties involved in

modeling financial markets. Firm—level arbitrage views
corporations as adjusting their mix of debt and real investment
so as to obtain the same after—tax return on a marginal
investment. That is, the firm is seen as always making a
                                 —6—

change that would give it a net positive cash flow in every

period (an arbitrage profit) ,   if    such a change is possible. On
the other hand, individual arbitrage assumes that individuals
capture any arbitrage profits that can be obtained by merely
altering the mix of debt and equity in their financial
portfolios. Both types of arbitrage have a good deal of
intuitive appeal as descriptions of financial market
equilibrium. The problem is that, in general, elimination of
opportunities for firms to earn arbitrage profits implies the
presence of opportunities for individuals to earn such profits,

and vice versa. This means that calculations of marginal
effective tax rates generally assume either that a household
receives different net returns from different assets when it

could gain by holding only highest—return assets, or that a
given physical piece of capital has different before—tax rates
of return depending on how it is financiedl (Bradford and
Fullerton, 1981; King and Fullerton, 1984; Fullerton, 1985).
     This inconsistency can at least partially be reconciled by
introducing costly bankruptcy or other forms of risk (Baumol

and Malkiel, 1967; Gordon and Malkiel, 1981). With risk
present, for instance, households could sensibly hold two
assets that earn different expected returns if the asset with

the greater return also is riskier. Although some research
along these lines has been conducted (Galper et al, 1985), it
is still unclear how changes in taxation might affect
incentives to invest when one convincingly takes account of
                               —7—

risk. Interestingly, recent analyses by Bulow and Summers
(1982) and Gordon (n.d.) suggest that taxes may generate
smaller distortions in a risky environment than in a riskiess
one. The explanation is that risk itself deters investment,
and that capital taxation transfers to the government not only
some of the expected return from an investment but also some of
the associated risk. It is this shift of risk to the
government that may offset, to some degree, the normal
disincentive effects of taxation.

     An important aspect of the debt—equity question is that
the current tax system treats debt very favorably compared to
equity. The fact that debt—financed projects have
substantially lower effective rates than equity—financed ones
is generally thought to be the source of significant
distortions ——   too much debt is issued and not enough equity
(see calculations in Gravelle, 1985). This may well be the
case, but there is at present little knowledge of just how
these distortionary costs ultimately manifest themselves. One
approach, for instanoe, is that the controlling equity owners
in a highly leveraged firm may direct the firm to take
excessive risks, with a resulting excessive probability of

bankruptcy (e.g., Gordon and Malkiel, 1981; Fullerton and
Gordon, 1983). However, it seems implausible that bankruptcies
burn up billions of dollars per year worth of real resources in
lawyers fees. Without a clearer understanding of exactly what
resources are lost due to a tax system that artificially
                                —8—

encourages debt over equity finance, it is hard to feel
confident that these putative substantial losses actually
exist.

     Another possible approach for dealing with the problem of

wanting to impose sensible but mutually inconsistent arbitrage
assumptions is to allow households and firms to have different

tax situations (Miller, 1977; Auerbach, 1983). It may then be
that taxpayers specialize in holding assets that are compatible
with their tax situations, so arbitrage need not drive rates -of

return to equality. While this approach has some appeal, it is

technically very complicated because the marginal effective tax
rate for a given investment would then depend on the
characteritics of the specific saver financing the investment
as well as on those of the firm that undertakes the
investment. Little has been done to analyze investment
incentives in such a setting.

     B. Neglected Tax Rules. Although many of the simpler
user—cost based calculations of marginal effective tax rates
consider only rates on corporate investment in structures and

equipment and include corporate taxes, depreciation rules, and
investment tax credits, more recent analyses also treat

non—corporate investment, owner—occupied housing, investment in
inventories, and public utilities and include, when relevent,
the effects of dividend relief, inflation—indexing of

depreciation allowances and interest, capital—gains provisions,
and inventory accounting rules (Fullerton, 1985; Grave].le,
                                —9—

1985). However, there are still many features of the tax code
that have not yet been incorporated into effective rate
calculations. Examples of excluded features that almost
certainly affect investment incentives include
     (a) for extractive and natural resources: depletion

allowances, rules for intangible drilling costs, royalty
(capital gains) taxation, and energy credits;
     (b) for financial institutions: reserve requirements,
bad—debt deductions, the treatment of tax—exempt bonds, foreign
tax credits, reserve deductions and other features of the tax
treatment of insurance companies;

     (C)   for   tax shelters generally: minimum tax provisions
and rules for limited partnerships.

     This list, which is far from complete, also suggests that
current calculations of marginal effective tax rates only
imprecisely measure incentives to invest. The imprecision may
be more severe for certain industries, such as extractive and
natural resources, financial services, and possibly real
estate.

     C. International Considerations. Many calculations of
effective tax rates implicitly assume that the U.S. economy is
"closedTM, which means that changes in the taxation of capital

in the U.S. do not induce capital flows to or from foreign
countries. To understand how this assumption is built in, note
that domestic saving and investment must be equal in a closed
economy, so any taxes on saving, such as personal income taxes,
                              —10—

are also part of the effective tax on investment. In an open
economy, however, domestic saving and investment differ by the
amount of capital flows with the rest of the world. Without
this equality between the levels of domestic saving and
investment, taxes on saving need have no effect on incentives
for domestic investment. For instance, a reduction in personal
taxes could stimulate domestic saving and thereby increase
investment elsewhere in the world with little or no change in
                                                               -
domestic investment. Taxes on domestic saving are thus not

part   of the effective tax rate on investment in an open
economy. Instead, the effective rate in an open economy takes
the rate of return that must be paid to attract funds as the
rate required in international capital markets (and not as the

rate required by domestic savers). In principle, one might
still distinguish between debt and equity finance, and might
assume that investors in international capital markets require
different rates of return on debt and equity if this difference

reflects, say, differing risks.
       Because there is substantial evidence that international
capital flows can equate rates of return in different
countries, it might seem natural to calculate effective tax
rates under the assumption that capital markets are open.

Surprisingly, however, essentially no existing calculations,
for the U.S. at least, explicitly view effective rates as
determined in an open economy. Perhaps the calculations that
are most consistent with an open—economy view are the most
                               —11—

naive ones, which merely assume a constant opportunity cost of
funds. If one interprets this cost as the return required by
international lenders, the naive analyses can be interpreted as
reflecting investment incentives in an open economy. However,
the more sophisticated effective rate calculations, which

explicitly include taxes paid by domestic savers, appear to be
inconsistent with the idea that international capital markets
channel investment into the countries that yield the greatest
returns.                                                        -




    Whether one views the economy as open or closed also
determines assumption of choice concerning relationship between
inflation and interest rates. In a closed economy, one might
expect interest rates to rise by more than one point per
additional point of inflation, in order to maintain a constant
after—tax real interest rate (Darby, 1975; Feldstein, 1976;
Tanzi, 1976). In an open economy facing a constant world
interest   rate, however, international arbitrage of interest
("net—interest parity") implies that a constant before—tax real
interest rate is more plausible (Hansson and Stuart, 1985).
These two scenarios have very different implications about the
sensitivity of effective tax rates to changes in inflation.


III. Policy—induced Wealth Transfers


     Effective rate calculations typically examine investment
incentives under a given tax code and assume that tax code
                             —12—

will be in effect forever. This assumption is certainly useful
as a simplifying device but the fact that past policy changes

have occurred relatively frequently suggests it may be
misleading. In particular, the incentive to undertake an
investment depends on any up—front taxes or subsidies that the
investment may attract as well as on the stream of future tax
liabilities the investor expects will be levied over the
lifetime of the asset. To the extent that changes in the tax
system create an expectation of future tax changes, investment
incentives will be affected in a way not captured in
traditional effective rate calculations.
     A hypothetical example illustrates the basic ideas. To
keep things very simple, consider a world that initially has no

taxes on capital. In a given year, say year one, the
government announces a policy of allowing an investment tax
credit. To finance the first year of this credit, the

government imposes a once—only "windfall profits tax. The
government also announces that in the future, the investment
tax credit will be financed by an increase in the tax on labor
income. Economists then set out to calculate marginal
effective tax rates on new investment. They first note that
the windfall profits tax is a tax on old and not new capital,
and that the labor tax is a tax on labor and not capital. This
leaves the effects of the investment tax credit. Suppose the
economists correctly apply the Hall—Jorgenson formula and come
to the conclusion that the marginal effective tax rate under
                              —13—

the new tax code is — 10%; that is, that investment income

receives a 10% subsidy.

    A year later, it is time to raise the tax on labor.
Because taxes on labor are already high, the government decides
to postpone the increase in these taxes for one year. As a
stopgap measure, the windfall profits tax is extended for an
additional year and is imposed on all capital existing as of
year one, so as just to pay for the investment tax credit.
                                                                -
Economists review their marginal effective rate calculations
and note that nothing has changed ——   the marginal effective
rate on new investment still equals —10%. In year three and in

all succeeding years, the government again postpones the labor
tax increase and extends the windfall profits tax "for only one

more yearN, just as in year two.
     Although investors may have trouble reading the tea leaves
in years one and two, at some point they are likely to figure
out what is going on. The pattern of taxation in this example
is that the government subsidizes investment up front but then
fully recaptures the subsidy in future years via the windfall
profits tax. Thus while economists using the traditional
methodology continually issue statements that the marginal
effective tax rate is —10%, the "true" effective rate that
determines the incentive to invest is zero because capital was
initially untaxed and because subsidies and (so—called)
windfall taxes net to zero.
     Investors do not necessarily have to analyze the
                               —14—

pattern of taxation here logically and rationally for this to
be the case. For instance, suppose there are two types of
investors in the market: (i) those who listen to economists
and make investments that would be profitable if and only if a
10% subsidy were paid on each investment; and (ii) those who
follow the simple rule of thumb of oniy making investments that
would pay off with a zero subsidy (tax) on new investment.
Clearly, the former investors will eventually end up going
bankrupt, while the latter will survive. More generally, ori
expects   a tendency toward positive natural selection of
investors whose behavior reflects a zero effective tax rate.

Thus, even though nobody here need to be behaving rationally,
actual long—run investment incentives in the market would be

correctly represented by thinking of investors as rationally
expecting that future governments will recapture investment
subsidies, so the expected effective tax rate on new investment
(in this particular example) is zero.

     Although this example is obviously contrived, it does
illustrate an important point. In an environment in which tax
policy is continually being adjusted, a correct evaluation of
the incentive effects of a change in policy requires
consideration of the impact of the change on expectations of
future policy. We now consider several less contrived

examples.
     First, it is generally believed that the introduction of
the investment tax credit in 1962 and accelerations of
                               —15—

depreciation in recent years have caused marginal effective

rates to decline over the post—war period. For instance, King
and Fullerton (1984) calculate effective overall corporate
marginal rates of 48% in 1960, 37% in 1980, and 31% in 1982
after ERTA and TEFRA (see also Hulten and Robertson, 1981).
This suggests that tax policy has become more favorable to
investment over time. However, if "true" (actually realized)
marginal effective rates really have fallen, this should show
                                                               -
up in the form of lower actual tax payments. King and
Fullerton   cite fragmentary evidence on average tax rates, which
essentially reflect actual tax payments. One measure of the
average tax rate was 47% in 1953—59 and 49% in 1972—74 (when
the investment tax credit was in effect). A slightly different
measure, calculated for 1978—80, suggested an average tax rate
of 59%. Somewhat less sophisticated but more continuous data
are in figure 1, which details the behavior of the ratio of

receipts from corporate profits taxes to corporate profits.
These data suggest essentially no trend in the realized tax

rate on corporate profits over the post—war period.
     Apparently, then, those who viewed the investment
incentives built into the tax code in recent decades as a

signal that new capital would end up being taxed relatively
favorably were mistaken. To the extent that investors' long—
run behavior eventually adjusts to reflect the actual long—run
pattern of taxation, one would conclude that the incentive
effect of past and possibly future schemes to encourage
                               —16—

investment may be diluted. Unfortunately, little analysis has
been directed at evaluating the extent to which investors'
behavior does reflect an expectation of changes in future

policy. However, work by Auerbach and Hines (n.d.) suggests
that investors at least partially behave as if they understand
the direction of future policy changes.
      The notion of commitment by the government to a given
policy is important here. This is illustrated nicely by
proposals to index depreciation allowances for inflation.     In

effect, indexing is an implicit promise by today's government
to allow investors to deduct larger amounts in the future to
compensate for erosion of real depreciation allowances due to
inflation. Clearly, the indexation of depreciation increases
the expected net return to an investment if investors believe
that (U the promise of greater future deductions will be
honored and (ii) the government will not later undertake some
tax   change that recaptures the future revenue lost to it by
indexing. If the government can make such a commitment and
investors come to know this then marginal effective tax rates,
as they are traditionally calculated, will correctly reflect
investment incentives. However, if the government continually
changes policy to recapture tax preferences that investors
counted on when they made their. investments, then not only will

traditionally calculated marginal effective rates be misleading
(and generally too optimistic), but actual incentives for
investment can be quite low. Obviously, these points apply to
                              —17—

tax policy toward investment generally arid not just to

proposals to index depreciation deductions.

     This desirability of maintainjnQ a commitment may explain
why policy—makers do not eliminate the deductibility of
mortgage interest payments. If one were to design a tax system
from scratch, it might well be optimal not to encourage

artifically the consumption of owner—occupied housing by
allowing interest—deductibility. However, the tax code
currently allows such deductibility and many individuals have-
purchased homes at prices that reflect the capitalized value of
the deductions. Starting from such a situation, the
elimination of deductibility, even if existing mortgages were
grandfathered, would cause large capital losses to homeowners.
In effect, these losses would result from an unanticipated

confiscation of private wealth by the government. One possible
outcome would be that agents might fear similar confiscation of
saved and invested wealth in the future. This could reduce
incentives for saving and investment.

     Finally, not all expected future tax changes involve
losses for investors. For instance, suppose the government
commonly uses the investment tax credit to stimulate the
economy, allowing the credit when business activity is weak and
removing it when overall activity is strong. Suppose as well
that investors come to learn this pattern. Rational investors
will then try to time their investments to coincide with
periods when the investment tax credit is in place (Lucas,
                              —18—

1976). This may cause investment to vary more over time than
it would if the investment credit never were used. In fact,
the rough data on investment in equipment in the U.S., which

are displayed in figure 2, suggest just such a tendency. The
investment tax credit was first allowed in 1962, and was
repealed in 1969, reinstated in 1971, and temporarily increased
in 1975. This temporary increase was made permanent in 1978
and a small additional increase was permitted under ERTA in
1981. One sees from the figure that investment in equipment
has exhibited substantially greater swings after 1962 than
before, possibly reflecting the on—off use of the investment
tax credit as a macroeconomic stabilization tool.
Expectationa]. effects of this sort, which obviously affect

investment incentives, are not captured in traditional
calculations of marginal effective tax rates.
                                 —19—


REFERENCES

Auerbach, A., "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the
     Cost of Capital", Journal of Economic Literature 21
     (1983): 905—40.

Auerbach, A. and J. Limes, "Tax Reform, Investment, and the
     Value of the Firm", NBER Working Paper No 1803, no date.
Baumol, W. and B. Malkiel, "The Firm's Optimal Debt—Equity
     Ratio and the Cost of Capital", Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 81 (1967): 547—78.

Bradford, D. and D. Fullerton, "Pitfalls in the Construction
     and Use of Effective Tax Rates", in C. Hulten (ed.)

     Depreciation, Inflation and the Taxation of Income from
     Capital. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, 1981.
Bulow, J. and L. Summers, "The Taxation of Risky Assets", NBER

     Working Paper No. 897, 1982.
Darby, M., "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary Policy on

     Interest Rates", Economic Inquiry 13 (1975): 266—76.
Feldstein, M., "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of
     Interest: A Theoretical Analysis", American Economic
     Review 66 (1976): 809—20.

Fullerton, D., "The Indexation of Interest, Depreciation, and
     Capital Gains: A Model of Investment Incentives", AEI
     Working Paper No. 5, 1985.
Fullerton, D., "Which Effective Tax Rate", National Tax Journal
     37 (1984): 23—41.
                             —20—


Fullerton, P. and R. Gordon, "A Reexamination of Tax
    Distortions in General Equilibrium Models" in M. Feldstein
     (ed.) Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy

    Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Galper, H., R. Lucke, and E. Toder, "Taxation, Portfolio
     Choice, and the Allocation of Capital", Working Paper,
     1985.

Gordon, R., "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax
     Revenues versus Tax Distortions", Working Paper, no date.
Gordon, R. and B. Malkiel, "Corporate Finance", in H. Aaron and

     j. Pechman (eds.) How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior.

     Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1981.
Gravelle, J., "Effects of Business Tax Provisions in the

     Administration's Tax Proposal: Updated Tables",
     Congressional Research Service Working Paper No. 85—783E,
     1985.

Hall, R. and D. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment
     Behavior", American Econonic Review 57 (1967): 391—414.

Hansson I. and C. Stuart, "The Fisher Hypothesis and
     International Capital Markets", Journal of Political

     Economy, forthcoming, 1985.
Hulten, C. and J. Robertson, "Corporate Tax Policy and Economic
     Growth: An Analysis of the 1981 and 1982 Tax Acts", Urban
     Institute Discussion Paper, 1981.
                              —21—



King, M. and D. Fullerton (eds.), The Taxation of Income from

     Capital. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Lucas, R., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique", in
     K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds.) the Phillips Curve and
     Labor Markets. Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing
     Company, 1976.

Miller, M., "Debt and Taxes", Journal of Finance 32 (1977):
     261—75.

Tanzi, V., "Inflation, Indexation, and Interest Income
     Taxation", Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review 29
     (1976): 54—76.
                            5          /
 RATIO OF CORPORATE TAX PAYMENTS TO PROFITS
0.70


0.65


0.60


0.55


0.50


0.45


0.40


0.35


0.30
       1954   1959   1964       1969       1974   1979   1984
                                          1




             REAL NET INVESTMENT IN EQUIPMENT
                      AS A PERCENT OF REAL NNP
 3

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

 2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

  1



0.8

0.6

0.4
      1954     1959   1964       1969            1974   1979   1984
                                                                                       TABLE 1

                                                        Mar_ginal Effective Total    Tax Rates Under Different Assumptions1

                                             Firm Arbitrage                  Individual Arbitrage                       Firm Arbitrage
                                                 (s.O5)                                 (s.05)                                (s—.03)
                                      1985                White              1985                  WhIte             1985                White
                                      Law    Treasury     House              Law        Treasury   House            Law       Treasury   House
Corporate Sector Tax Rates
     EquIpnnt                        —.183      .402      .245                .046        .410     .269            —.587        .421     .273
     Structures                       .379      .456      .363                .409        .460     .383              .468       .489     .392
     Public Utilities                 .295      .435      .297               .327         .439     .302              .403       .478     .380
     Inventories                      .416      .424      .388               .478         .431     .406              .403       .446     .405
     Land                             .449      .448      .419               .496         .453     .431              .465       .483     .455

     Overall Corporate Rate           .311     .431       .344               .376         .437     .360              .333       .461     .380

Noncorporate Sector Tax   Rates
     Equipment                       —.101     .273       .202              —.133        .282      .212            ..199        .311     .246
     Structures                       .281     .314       .280               .299        .325      .289             .333        .363     .325
     Public Utilities                 .210     .328       .259               .233        .343      .276             .276        .390     .333
     Residential Structures           .326     .353       .327               .351        .369      .343             .395        .421     .395
     Inventories                      .305     .289       .287               .317        .299      .296             .338        .329     .326
     Land                             .333     .320       .317               .349        .332      .329             .377        .372     .369
     Residential Land                 .382     .373       .371               .404        .390      .388             .443        .443     .441

     Overall Noncorporate Rate        .307     .327       .310               .325        .340      .323             .357        .382     .366

Owner—Occupied Housing Tax    Rate    .172     .217       .230               .191        .210      .241'            .263        .342     .339

Overall   Tax Rate                    .263     .335       .294               .304        .341      .311             .318       .398      .360

Standard Deviation                   .0171     .0117      .0093              .0137       .0108     .0071            .0146      .0070     .0078
Interest Rate                        .1316     .1111      .1230              .1170       .1026     .1132            .1024      .0861     .0954


1.   For the case of 4 percent inflation.

Source:   Fullerton (1985)
