                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TAXES, BUDGET DEFICITS
                             AND CONSUMER SPENDING:
                                SOME NEW EVIDENCE




                                Martin Feldstein

                              Douglas W. Elmendorf




                             Working Paper No. 2355




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  August 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2355
                                                August 1987


              Taxes, Budget Deficits and Consumer Spending:

                            Some New Evidence



                                ABSTRACT


     Because of the restrictive assumptions required to establish
the theory of Ricardian equivalence, its relevance in practice is
essentially an empirical question. The strongest direct evidence
in favor of Ricardian equivalence is Roger Kormendi's (1983)
article in the American Economic Review. That paper appeared to
provide strong empirical support for Ricardian equivalence by
showing that increases in government spending on goods and
services depress consumer spending while changes in tax receipts
have no effect on consumer spending.
     The present study shows that Kormendi's results are a
misleading implication of the experience during World War II when
shortages, rationing and patriotic appeals to self-restraint
caused an abnormally high rate of saving at the same time that
the government deficit-financed a uniquely massive increase in
defense spending. When those years are excluded from the sample,
Kormendi's results are reversed.
     The estimates presented here show that in the equation
specified by Kormendi, but with the years 1941 through 1946
excluded, increases in tax receipts have had a substantial
negative effect on consumption while increases in government
spending on goods and services have had essentially no effect on
consumption. This evidence is exactly the opposite of the
implications of Ricardian equivalence. This conclusion is robust
with respect to a variety of modifications in the way that the
basic equation is estimated: using an AR1 correction to deal with
serial correlation; limiting the analysis to the Federal
government's fiscal variables; respecifying the variables as
ratios to net national product to reduce collinearity; estimating
for the most recent 35 years instead of for the period since
1931; and using an instrumental variable procedure to reduce the
problem of endogeneity. In each of these specifications, the
results indicate that taxes depress consumer spending while
government outlays on goods and services have either a smaller or
a totally insignificant effect.

Martin Feldstein                       Douglas W. Elmendorf
National Bureau of Economic            National Bureau of Economic
  Research                               Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                    Cambridge, MA 02138
          Taxes, Budget Deficits and Consumer Spending:
                    Some New Evidence
               Martin Feldstein and Douglas W. Elmendorf*

     Perhaps no issue has generated as much controversy among
economists in the past decade as the proposition that an increase
in the government deficit induces an equal offsetting increase in
private saving. The truth of this so-called Ricardian
equivalence proposition is central to whether budget deficits

reduce capital accumulation, to the feasibility of expansionary
tax reductions, and to the effects of social security on private

saving and aggregate capital accumulation.
     Although the basic idea that the future tax liabilities
associated with government deficits and debt induce individuals
to increase their saving has been around since the time of David
Ricardo and was treated explicitly by Don Patinkin (1965), Martin
Bailey (1971) and Levis Kochin (1974), the current debate was
launched by Robert Barro (1974). The voluminous theoretical
literature of recent years has shown that complete Ricardian

equivalence would be expected to prevail only under very special
conditions; see Douglas Bernheim (1987) for an especially useful

     *Martin Feldstein is Professor of Economics at Harvard
University and President of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Douglas Elmendorf is a graduate student at Harvard
University and a research assistant at the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We are grateful to Greg Mankiw and Lawrence
Summers for comments on an earlier draft. The research reported
here is part of the NBER study of the Government Budget and the
Private Economy.
survey and analysis. But the theoretical restrictiveness of the

assumptions required for complete Ricardian equivalence does not
constitute a practical refutation. Defenders of Ricardian
equivalence can argue that the theory is only an approximation
and can claim that, although the stringent conditions required
for complete Ricardian equivalence do not hold, the economy's
behavior in practice is close to the predictions of Ricardian

equivalence.
     The key empirical question is whether a higher level of

taxes (with government spending constant) induces individuals to
reduce their spending on consumption as traditional theory holds
or has no effect on consumer spending as the Ricardian
equivalence proposition predicts. The existence of a moderate
negative effect of government outlays on consumer spending is not
in itself evidence in favor of the Ricardian equivalence
proposition that individuals increase their saving to finance
anticipated debt service. As Feldstein (1982) explained,
consumers may correctly believe that a rise in current government
spending is a good indicator of a higher level of future
government spending. Once a program is launched or budgets
increased, the process is unlikely to be reversed. An increase
in current government spending is therefore a good indication
that future taxes will have to be higher to finance a higher

level of future government spending. Individuals may rationally
reduce their own spending when government outlays increase
without a concurrent increase in taxes because they anticipate

                                2
higher future taxes to finance higher future government spending
even if they give little or no weight to the debt service
implications of the current deficit.
     The strongest direct evidence in favor of Ricardian
equivalence is Roger Kormendi's 1983 article in the American

Economic Review. He presents consumption regression equations
that relate an estimate of consumption' to net national product,

wealth, government debt, government spending on goods and
services, taxes, transfers, corporate retained earnings and
government interest payments. His parameter estimates appear to
show that an increase in taxes does not affect consumption at all

while an increase in government spending on goods and services
does reduce consumption. Thus whatever the theoretical
shortcomings of the Ricardian equivalence theory, it would appear
from Kormendi's results that in practice consumers behave as the

Ricardian equivalence theory predicts.2

     1Kormendi defines consumption as the sum of current
expenditures on services and nondurables plus 10 percent of
current expenditures on consumer durables and 30 percent of the
stock of consumer durables.
      2There have of course been other tests of Ricardian
equivalence. John Seater and Roberto Mariano (1985) interpret
their evidence as supporting Ricardian equivalence while the
evidence of Michael Darby et. al. (1987) and of Feldstein (1982)
is inconsistent with Ricardian equivalence. There have also been
indirect tests of Ricardian equivalence based on examining the
effects of government deficits on real interest rates and on the
exchange rate. The results of these tests have been mixed. Some
researchers, including Charles Plosser (1982) and Paul Evans
 (1985), found that budget deficits do not change interest rates
or the value of the dollar while others, including Feldstein
 (1986) and Michael Hutchinson and Adrian Throop (1986), have
found the opposite. A discussion of these articles lies beyond
the scope of this paper.
                                 3
    Kormefldi'S analysis has been criticized by James Barth et.

al. (1986) and by Franco Modigliani and Arlie sterling (1986).
Although we are unconvinced by Kormendi'S analysis, we do not
find that either of those comments is a persuasive refutation of
the Kormendi study. While Barth et. al. conclude that their

results "raise sufficient questions about the robustness and
interpretation of Kormendi'S original findings that more
empirical work in this important research area is clearly needed"

(page 1165), their estimates generally support Kormendi'S
principal finding that consumer spending is sensitive to
government outlays on goods and services but not to taxes. Their
analysis extends the Kormendi sample through 1983, separates
federal government debt from state and local debt, estimates for
alternative subperiods, and tries substituting the par value of
government debt for the market value of the debt even though they
recognize that the latter is the conceptually appropriate
measure. The only estimates in which the effect of government
spending is not at least marginally significantly negative are in
equations estimated for the postwar period that contain the
theoretically inappropriate par value of the government debt. In

no equation do taxes have a significant negative effect.
     The essential feature of the Modigliani and Sterling

 analysis is to replace the separate tax, transfer and government
 interest variables with a combined "net tax" variable that is
 equal to government taxes net of transfers including government
 net domestic interest payments. The sum of the distributed lag

                                 4
coefficients of this net tax variable is significantly negative
in the Modigliani-Sterling consumer expenditure equations and is
not significantly different from the sum of the lag coefficients

of net national product. In this specification the coefficient
of the government spending variable is small and not
significantly different from zero. Modigliani and Sterling
interpret their estimates as "strikingly and unmistakenly
consistent with a Life Horizon'-Life Cycle approach to
consumption behavior and equally inconsistent with the infinite

horizon Ricardian Equivalence Proposition formulation" (page

1178).

     Unfortunately, however, Modigliani and Sterling do not
provide an explicit test of the effect of taxes per Se on
consumption but only of the combined "net tax" variable. Since
the coefficient of the transfers variable in the original

Kormendi analysis was positive, large, and statistically
significant, it is not surprising that the variable created by
subtracting transfers from taxes has a coefficient that is

negative, large and statistically significant. This should be
expected regardless of any additional changes in variable
definitions or estimation procedures. Although the variable is
correctly labeled as "net taxes," its coefficient is essentially
an indication of the effect of transfers. Similarly, although

Modigliani and Sterling do present two specifications that
include transfers as a separate variable, in both of those
equations they constrain the coefficient of the net tax variable

                                5
to equal the coefficient of net national product, so no separate
estimates of the effects of taxes and transfers can be inferred.
     These objections do not detract from the force of the
Modigliani-Sterling argument that transfers are negative taxes

and that the two should therefore be treated symmetrically in any

analysis of Ricardian equivalence. If this is accepted,
Kormendi's own estimates of the effect of transfers on
consumption provide a strong refutation of the Ricardian

equivalence proposition. Kormendi's reply that transfers are

received by a subgroup of the population that is liquidity
constrained suggests at a minimum that not all taxes and

taxpayers should satisfy the Bicardian equivalence proposition.
     We are nevertheless left without any direct test of

Kormendi's conclusion that government spending depresses consumer
spending while taxes do not. There are two ways in which
Kormendi's research could be subject to further analysis. The
first would be to develop a more general model of which
Kormendi's is a special case and to evaluate the relative
importance of government spending and taxes in that more general
model. Such a model might include the real net interest rate,
alternative measures of household wealth, the age distribution of
the population, the income distribution, and other variables that
could influence consumer spending but that are not part of the
Kormendi analysis. The alternative and more modest but direct
approach followed in the present paper is to see whether
Kormendi's results remain when his equation is re-estimated by

                                6
different statistical techniques, using different functional
forms, and for periods that exclude the World War II years when

consumer spending was constrained by shortages and rationing.
When this is done, the results are quite contrary to Kormendi's
and relect the Ricardian equivalence proposition.
     More specifically, the present paper shows that Kormendi's
results are misleading and cannot be sustained when the war years

1941 through 1946 are excluded from the sample. Omitting this
period of wartime shortages and rationing and estimating for the
period through 1985 reverses Kormendi's principal finding and
shows that higher taxes depress consumption while an increase in
government spending has no significant effect on consumption.
This conclusion is confirmed when Kormendi's procedure of
estimating in first difference form is replaced by a more

appropriate estimation using a first-order autoregressive
transformation of an equation specified in levels.3

     The paper begins (section I) by replicating Kormendi's
estimates and extending the end of the sample period from 1976 to
1985. Section II then shows the critical importance of

       A proponent of Ricardian equivalence might of course say
that this reversal of Kormendi's empirical findings does not
contradict Ricardian equivalence since current taxes may be a
proxy for future government spending. This line of argument,
carried to the extreme, would make it impossible to refute
Ricardian equivalence with estimates of consumer behavior. There
is also a conceptual problem since taxes finance not only
government spending on goods and services but also the
empirically more important transfer payments and debt service.
Moreover, regression equations estimated with our data (and
similar equations estimated by Modigliani and Sterling) fail to
find any predictive effect of current taxes on future spending.

                                7
Kormendi'S practice of including the war years.   Section III

examines the effect of excluding state and local governments and
focusing on federal government spending, taxes, transfers, and
debt. The fourth section respecifies the equation in ratio form;
this reduces the problem of collinearity and produces
coefficients that imply stronger tax effects (with smaller
standard errors) and no effect of government spending. The fifth
section looks at estimates for the postwar period only while the
                                               estimates that treat
sixth section presents instrumental variable
the current values of taxes, transfers, government spending and
NNP as endogenous. There is a final concluding section.

i. Replication and Basic Variations

     Table 1 presents alternative estimates of Kormendi's basic

specification relating consumer spending to net national product
 (vt)' lagged net national product (vt-i)' government spending on
goods and services (GSt), total tax revenue (TXt), government
 debt at market value (GBt), transfer payments (TRt), private

 wealth excluding government debt (Wt), corporate retained
 earnings (REt), government interest payments (GINTt), and a
 constant term. Standard errors of the parameter estimates are
 shown in parentheses beneath each coefficient.

      Kormendi's original article presents detailed definitions
 and sources for these statistics. Since our purpose is to assess
 the sensitivity of Kormendi's conclusion to the inclusion of the
 World War II years, we have tried to stay as close as possible to

                                 8
                                                                Table 1

                                  Replication and Basic Variatis of the Koniendi Specification


Equation                                                                                          Li
Sanple            1931-76       1931-76      1931-76     1931-85     1931-40        1931-40     1931-40     1931-85
                                                                     1947-85        1947-84     1947-85
            *          1            2           3           3              3           2           3            3


Estimation            PD            PD          PD          PD             PD          PD         AR].        AR].


                      0.29         0.30         0.33        0.30           0.31        0.30        0.31        0.30
Y
    t                (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.06)         (0.07)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.07)

                      0.07         0.11         0.08        0.09           0.09        0.09        0.09        0.11
    t-               (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.04)

                     -0.23        -0.15        -0.12       -0.10           0.05        0.03        0.13       -0.11
CS
     t               (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.03)

                      0.07        -0.08        -0.17       -0.15          -0.17       -0.13       -0.16       -0.07
                     (0.08)       (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.11)         (0.13)      (0.13)      (0.12)      (0.12)

GB                   -0.055       -0.039       -0.014      -0.008         -0.0004      0.014       0.081      -0.010
        t            (0.018)      (0.029)      (0.030)     (0.026)        (0.030)     (0.029)     (0.032)     (0.030)

                      0.83          0.70        0.45        0.66           0.66        0.76        0.84        0.83
                     (0.15)        (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.21)         (0.20)      (0.20)      (0.14)      (0.19)

                      0.025        0.021        0.033       0.015          0.014       0.016       0.020       0.024
                     (0.008)       (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.009)        (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.008)

RE                    0.10         -0.04       -0.13       -0.03           0.02        0.05       -0.04        0.16
                     (0.11)        (0.15)      (0.18)      (0.17)         (0.18)      (0.17)      (0.18)      (0.20)

GINT                  1.15         2.15         1.71        1.13           0.88        0.66        0.89        1.31
                     (0.91)        (1.15)      (1.16)      (0.66)         (0.63)      (0.57)      (0.50)      (0.66)

R2                    0.91         0.83         0.79        0.75           0.79        0.83        0.999       0.999

SR                   17.5          22.3        56.4        61.4           57.4        24.7        62.2        48.0

p
                                                                                                   0.76        0.86

tJ Stat.              n.a.          1.5         1.6         1.7            1.7         1.6         1.8         1.7


!CrE: ihe dependent variable is consuiption. A constt tenn was 1xild in d estiaation hit is
rt reported. Stard errors are in parentheses. See text for definition of variables.
*
    Data:       KoniErxil      Pre-Bemhirk
his specification and his definitions in constructing the
regression variables for our analysis. As far as we can tell,
there are only two small differences between our definitions and

Kormendi's. First, we use the personal consumption price
deflator for all variables while Kormendi uses different price
deflators for different variables. Second, we use the Federal
Reserve Flow of Funds Balance Sheets for the U.S. Economy, 1946-
85 as the source of data on "domestic net assets" to measure
private nonhuman wealth while Kormendi rescales estimates of
several types of wealth presented in the Survey of Current
Business; the Federal Reserve data have the virtue of being

directly comparable to the estimates by Raymond Goldsmith used by
Kormendi and by us for the earlier years of the sample.
Kormendi's series on the market value of the government debt is
extended using the method developed in James Butkiewicz (1983).
A complete listing of the data is available on request.
     Equation 1.1 of Table 1 reproduces the parameter estimates
reported in Table 5 of Kormendi. This is the only equation
reported by Kormendi that includes both the tax variable and the
government debt variable. Note that it is estimated in first
difference form for the entire sample from 1931 through 1976
including the years of World War II. In this specification an
extra dollar of government spending on goods and services reduces
consumer outlays by 23 cents. By contrast, an extra dollar of
tax revenue has no statistically significant effect; its
coefficient is actually positive but less than its standard

                                9
error. The coefficient of the government debt variable also has

an implausible negative sign but is actually statistically
significant. Although this might have been interpreted as
evidence that the equation is misspecified or misestimated,
Kormendi just notes that the negative coefficient is clearly
contrary to the traditional theory that implies that government
debt is a form of wealth that should have a positive effect on

consumption.
     Equation 1.2 represents our attempt to replicate the
original Kormendi estimation for his sample period of 1931-1976.
Since Kormendi's equation was estimated with the data available
before the major 1985 benchmark revision of the national income
accounts, we used pre-benchmark revision data to estimate
equation 1.2. Although the results are not identical to equation
1.1 (presumably because of earlier revisions in the national
income and wealth statistics and perhaps because of inadvertent
differences in the way that the data are constructed), the
coefficients are quite similar to Kormendi's results in equation

1.1. In particular, the government spending coefficient is -0.15
with a standard error of only 0.03, implying a significant effect
of government spending on consumption while the tax coefficient
is only -0.08 with a standard error of 0.10. The coefficient of
the debt variable remains negative and larger than its standard
error.

     Equation 1.3 repeats this estimation for the same sample
period but with the most recent available data (as of July 1987).

                               10
The primary effect of this data revision is to increase the
coefficient of the tax variable to -0.17 with a standard error of

o.ii, implying that the hypothesis that the true tax coefficient
is zero or positive can be rejected at a 7 percent significance
level. The coefficient of the government debt variable is still
negative but drops to less than half its standard error. The
government spending variable is reduced in size but is still
substantially greater than its standard error.

     Extending the sample period through 1985 (equatiOn 1.4)

leaves these key parameter estimates essentially unchanged.    The

coefficient of the government spending variable is significantly
negative while the coefficient of the tax variable, although

absolutely larger than the government spending coefficient, is
only significant at the 10 percent level.

II. Excluding the War Years

     A crucial feature of the Kormendi estimates is that his

sample includes the war years when consumption was reduced by

widespread rationing, by shortages of consumer durables and other
consumer goods, and by patriotic appeals to purchase saving
bonds. The personal saving rate jumped from 4.0 percent in 1940
to 10.9 percent in 1941 and to more than 20 percent in each of

the next three years before subsiding to 19.2 percent in 1945 and
 8.6 percent in 1946. The war years were also a time in which
government spending rose much more than tax revenue.   Real

 government spending on goods and services in 1982 dollars jumped

                                11
from $150 billion in 1940 to $484 billion in 1942 and $791
billion in 1944, a level that has never been reached again. By
contrast, real tax revenue only rose from $126 billion to $264
billion. The evidence presented below shows that the strong
correlation between wartime government spending and the high

saving rate caused by shortages and rationing causes a spurious

negative relation between government spending and personal
consumption in the sample as a whole.
     Because of the very unusual nature of the consumer goods
markets during the World War II period and the intense patriotic
appeals for increased saving, the World War II years should be

excluded in any regression analysis of saving behavior. Although
Kormendi does present some estimates that exclude the war years,
those equations never contain both the tax and government debt
variables and therefore do not provide an explicit test of the

Ricardian equivalence proposition.
     Equation 1.5 shows that when the six war years 1941 through
1946 are omitted, the remaining 49 observations tell a very
different story. In particular, the coefficient of the
government spending variable becomes very small and only about


     4Kormendi does present one equation in Table 4 without the
war years and with both government spending and taxes but without
government debt. We have followed Kormendi and re-estimated this
equation in first difference form but, unlike Kormendi, we did
not obtain a significant effect of government spending. Our
estimated coefficient of government spending was 0.02 with a
standard error of 0.08; by comparison, the tax variable had a
coefficient of -0.18 with a standard error of 0.12. The
difference in our finding may well reflect revisions in the
national income statistics.
                               12
half as large as its standard error. In contrast, the
coefficient of the tax variable is —0.17 with a standard error of
0.13 that implies that the null hypothesis of a zero or positive
effect can be rejected at the 10 percent level. It is clear that

including the war years produces very misleading results.
     As a check that the reason for the very different

conclusions implied by equations 1.1 and 1.5 is due to omitting
the war years and not to the recent benchmark data revision, we

have re-estimated equation 1.5 using the data available before
the 1985 benchmark revision. The results, presented in equation
1.6, are quite similar to those of 1.5 and indicate that it is
the exclusion of the war years rather than the data revision that
is critical.

     Kormendi explains that he estimates the equations in first
difference form to reduce the risk of the spurious results that
dive Granger and Paul Newbold (1974) have shown can occur when
the equations are estimated in level form and there is
substantial serial correlation of the residuals. However, using
first-difference estimation is less efficient than estimation in
level form with an autoregressive transformation. Moreover,

estimation by first-differencing has some further disadvantages.
If variables are measured with error the use of first difference
estimation increases the errors in variables bias. If the
response of consumers to an explanatory variable is not
immediate, the use of first difference estimation can cause a
substantial underestimation of its true effect. The remaining

                              13
equations of table 1 therefore present estimates in level form
after an AR1 transformation based on the estimated

autocorrelation coefficient.
     Equation 1.7 is estimated after an AR1 transformation with
an autocorrelation coefficient of 0.76. The results again
indicate that taxes have a negative effect while government
spending has a positive coefficient. The coefficient of the
government debt variable has the correct positive sign and is
more than twice its standard error; if anything, the coefficient
is implausibly large. Equation 1.8 shows the effect of including
the war years with the AR1 estimation; once again government
spending becomes significant while taxes and government debt are
insignificant. It is clear that the choice between first
difference estimation and an autoregressive transformation does
not affect the conclusion that the evidence in favor of Ricardian
equivalence rests on including the six years of World War II and
that when these years are excluded Ricardian equivalence is

clearly rejected.

III. Total Government or Federal Government

     Federal taxes and spending are very different from the taxes
and spending of state and local governments. Individuals can in

principle   avoid a very large part of the state and local taxes

that they pay by moving to a different jurisdiction where they
would also forego the benefits that higher tax dollars purchase.

Moreover, while approximately 75 percent of federal government

                                14
spending on goods and services is for national defense, the goods
and services spending of state arid local governments is for

education and other personal services of the local voters. State
and local debt is also different in kind from federal debt since

the value of such area-specific debt will tend to be reflected in

local property values.
     The equations presented in Table 2 compare the key fiscal

coefficients based on equations using the spending, taxes and

debt of all governments with the corresponding coefficients based
on equations using Federal government spending, taxes and debt.
Although only the coefficients of the three key fiscal variables

are shown, they are obtained from estimates of the full equations
of the form reported in Table 1; the full set of coefficients is

available on request. Separate estimates are reported for the
first difference and AR1 estimates.

     Equations 2.1 and 2.2, estimated in first difference form,
indicate that federal taxes have a more powerful and
statistically more significant effect on consumption than the

taxes of state and local governments. The other coefficients are
 similar with insignificant effects of government spending and
 government debt. In the ARi estimates reported in equations 2.3
 and 2.4 the principle difference is again that the tax
 coefficient is larger and statistically more significant in the
 federal specification than in the equation for all governments.

 This is even true when the war years are included (equations 2.5
 and 2.6); the coefficient of taxes in the federal equation is -

                                 15
0.30 (with a standard error of 0.12) and therefore about three

times as large as the coefficient of the government spending
variable. Thus when attention is restricted to the federal
fiscal variables, taxes are important even when the war years are

included although government spending is important only when the
war years are included.

IV. A Ratio Specification

     One of the problems in making precise inferences about the
coefficient values is the collinearity among net national product
and the various fiscal variables. The equations in Table 3
present an alternative specification that reduces the problem of
collinearity by dividing each of the variables by the current
value of net national product. These equations are estimated
only for the specification without the war years.
     Comparing the coefficients of Tables 2 and 3 shows that the
coefficient of the tax variable is much larger both absolutely
and relative to its standard error in the ratio specification
than in the linear specification. The coefficients of the

government spending variable generally remain positive and not
statistically significant. The coefficient of the debt variable
is positive, larger than its standard error and generally of a

plausible magnitude.
     The ratio specification thus provides even stronger evidence
against the Ricardian equivalence proposition than the linear
equations of Tables 1 and 2. The estimated autocorrelation

                               16
                                                 Tthle 2

                           Total Goverruent ver Federal Goyerrnent Only
                                       Selected Coefficients

Eauation Sa1e Estiniaticx
2.1        1931-40 First         All
                                         (
                                        0.05    -0.17   -O.CXXY 0.79    57.4   --   1.7
          1947-85 Differene            (0.09) (0.13) (0.030)
2.2       1931-40 First     Fed         0.02    -0.32  0.018 0.79       57.4   --   1.8
          1947-85 Differere            (0.09) (0.14) (0.034)
2.3       1931-40 AR1            All   0.13     -0.16      0.081 0.9995 48.0 0.76 1.8
          1947-85                      (0.09) (0.12) (0.032)
2.4       1931-40                Fed    0.13 -0.31   0.150 0.9995 48.3 0.84 2.0
          1947-85                      (0.09) (0.13) (0.i4
2.5       1931-85 First          All   -0.10    -0.15   -0.008   0.75   61.4   --   1.7
                    DiffererKe         (0.03)   (0.11) (0.026)
2.6       1931-85 First          Fed -0.09 -0.30           0.015 0.75   60.4   --   1.8
                    Differerve                  (0.12) (0.028)

I
                                       (0.03)


*
      estnated equations 3.r1e all of the variables presented m Table 1; stanlard
errors are shn in parentIses.
                                                  Table 3

                                     Variables as Ratios to ir-         *
                              1931-40,    1947-85; Selected Coefficients


Euation          Estimation

3.1              First     All            0.004 -0.51 0.045 0.91            0.010   --   2.3
                 Differere               (0.11) (0.19) (0.032)


3.2              First         Fed       -0.02    -0.77     0.058   0.93    0.009   --   2.5
                 Differer.e              (0.10)   (0.16) (0.032)
3.3             AR].           All       0.13     -0.69     0.039   0.996   0.007   .49 1.9
                                         (0.09) (0.08) (0.024)
3.4             AR].           Fed       0.16     -0.69     0.079   0.997   0.007   .37 1.9
                                         (0.08) (0.07) (0.015)

*
 The estimated equations ir1e all of t variables presented In table 1; stard
errors are shn in parenses.
parameters also show that there is less autocorrelation in the

ratio form than in the linear form.




V. The Postwar Period

     Combining the prewar and postwar years provides a sample of
49 usable observations and substantial variation in government
spending, taxes and national debt. It is nevertheless
interesting to look at a more recent period that avoids the
special conditions associated with the depression, the war and

the immediate postwar years. Table 4 presents estimates based on
the 35 years from 1951 through 1985. The four equations include
the level and NNP-ratio specifications and are estimated for the
federal government only as well as for all governments combined.
The coefficients are estimated with an AR1 transformation; the
estimated autocorrelation coefficients are all approximately

0.50.
        In all of the estimates, the coefficient of the government

spending variable is small, positive and much less than its
standard error. In contrast, the coefficient of the tax variable
 is negative and larger than its standard error. With the federal
 fiscal variables the tax coefficient is quite large and more than
 twice its standard error. The coefficients of the government

 debt variable are always positive and generally more than double
 their standard errors but also typically larger than theory would

 suggest.
                                  17
                                               Table 4

                                       Postwar Saiple: l951-8
                                       Selected Coefficients


           tional                                                  2
Ecuation Form       Estimation

4.1        Level       AR1       All   0.02   -0.19      0.078   0.999   47.2 0.52 1.8
                                       (0.13) (0.17) (0.043)
4.2        Level       MU        Fed   0.02   -0.36      0.113 0.999 46.4 0.53 2.0
                                       (0.14) (0.17) (0.051)
4.3        Ratio       AR1       All   0.06   -0.62    0.136 0.95        0.006 0.51 2.0
                                       (0.14) (0.15) (0.042)
4.4        Ratio        AR1      Fed   0.08   -0.60      0.190   0.96    0.005 0.53 2.0
                                       (0.12) (0.16) (0.034)

*
 The   estmated equations iit±xie all of the variables presented in table 1; st.ariard
errrors are sn in parentheses.
     The estimates based on postwar data are therefore strongly

contrary to the predictions of the Ricardian equivalence

hypothesis.

VI. Instrumental variable Estimation

     The parameter values reported by Kormendi were all estimated
without any attempt to deal with the problem of the endogeneity
of net national product and of the fiscal variables. That is
also the approach that has been followed until this point in the
present paper. It is easy to believe, however, that the current
values of NNP and the fiscal variables will be correlated with

the error of the consumption equation. A surprisingly large
level of consumer spending would probably raise NNP and taxes and

might reduce transfers, countercyclical government spending, and
the national debt. To the extent that this is true, the ordinary
least squares estimates would be biased and inconsistent.

     An instrumental variable estimation procedure can provide
consistent and asymptotically unbiased estimates in this context.

The practical problem is to find satisfactory instrumental
variables that are uncorrelated with the current disturbance to

consumer spending but highly correlated with the endogenous
explanatory variables. Variables like population that satisfy
the first criterion completely generally do poorly by the second
criterion. In the present study we have used as instruments the

past values of the endogenous variables lagged two, three and

four years; i.e., NNPt_2, NNPt_3, NNPt_4, GSt_2, GSt_3, GSt_4,

                               18
TXt_2, etc. These variables are clearly correlated with the
fundamental movements and short-term trends in the corresponding
variables but will only be correlated with the disturbance in the
consumption equation to the extent that those disturbances have a
high degree of serial correlation. While the instruments are not
perfect, the use of instrumental variable estimation provides a
check on the general qualitative properties of the ordinary least

squares estimates.
     Table 5 presents instrumental variable estimation for the
entire sample with the war years omitted. In order to obtain the
lagged values needed as instrumental variables it was necessary
to drop the first four years from the sample; the sample
therefore begins with 1935. In addition to instrumental variable
estimates in first difference form, we have also used Fair's
method to combine instrumental variable estimation and a
consistently estimated first-order autoregressive correction.5
     Although the instrumental variable estimates inevitably

appear less precise than ordinary least squares estimates, the
implications of Table 5 are very similar to those of the previous
ordinary least squares estimates. The coefficient of government

spending Is generally positive and insignificant while the
coefficient of the tax variable is generally negative and larger


     'Since our computer program could not apply Fair's method to
a sample with a gap in the data, we have applied Fair's method to
estimate our equation for the entire period from 1935 through
1985 but with individual dummy variables for each of the six war
years.

                               19
                                                 Table 5

                        InstruiEntal Variable Estimates for F\ill Sivle
             1934-40, 1947-85 for Fair's utld; 1935-40, 1947-85 for First Differ&xe
                                     Selected Coefficients*



          tional
Equation Foim      Estimation

5.1       Level    First        All     0.22      0.05     0.059 0.56       66.0    --   2.1
                   Differere            (0.21) (0.25) (0.039)
5.2       Level    Fair's       All     0.26     -0.13     0.039 0.999 56.2 0.84 1.6
                   Methxi               (0.10) (0.18) (0.028)

5.3       Ratio    First        A].].   -0.11    -0.39     0.053 0.80       0.012   --   1.7
                   Differerxe           (0.22)   (0.35)    (0.043)

5.4       Ratio    Fair's       All     0.15     -0.36     0.080 0.99       0.007 0.98 2.1
                   Met3xxl              (0.09) (0.15) (0.023)

5.5       level    First        Fed     0.17      0.10     0.053 0.34       80.9    --   2.2
                   Differerxe           (0.25) (0.31) (0.056)

5.6       Level    Fair's       Fed     0.19     -0.46     0.052     0.999 59.0 0.88 1.9
                   Medd                 (0.10) (0.16) (0.033)

5.7      Ratio     First        Fed     -0.29    -0.51     0.065     0.78   0.012   --   1.7
                   Differerxe           (0.27) (0.42) (0.047)

5.8      Ratio     Fair's       Fed     0.07     -0.70     0.084 0.99       0.007 0.52 2.2
                   MedEd                (0.07) (0.08) (0.015)


*
 The est:unate.d equations irwhe all of the variables presented in table 1; starard
errors are shn in parentheses.
than its standard error. The coefficient of the government debt
variable is always positive, generally greater than its standard
error and of a roughly appropriate size. The use of Fair's
method to correct for autocorrelation is generally helpful in
obtaining more precise and more stable coefficients. As we noted
with the OLS estimates of Tables 2 and 3, the results are
generally stronger for the Federal government fiscal variables
and for the ratio specification.
     Table 6 presents instrumental variable estimates for the

postwar sample. The pattern of coefficients is again
incompatible with the Ricardian equivalence proposition:

generally positive and insignificant coefficients on government
spending, negative and generally significant coefficients on the
tax variable (with particularly strong effects in the ratio
specification), and positive effects of the government debt.

VII. Concluding Comment

     Because of the restrictive assumptions required to establish
the theory of Ricardian equivalence, its relevance in practice is

essentially an empirical question. Roger Kormendi's paper
appeared to provide strong empirical support for Ricardian
equivalence by showing that increases in government spending on
goods and services depress consumer spending while changes in tax
receipts have no effect on consumer spending.
     The present study shows that Kormendi's results are a
misleading implication of the experience during World War II when

                               20
                                                 Table 6

                   Instruiental Variable Estinates for Postwar Saivle:        1951-85
                                      Selected Coefficients




          tior1
Equation Form        tlznation

6.1       Level    First         All   -0.16     0.24 -0.008         0.53    67.6     --    1.3
                   Differeme           (0.21)   (0.30)     (0.061)


6.2       Level    Fair's        All    0.07    -0.11      0.030     0.999   57.7    0.996 1.6
                   Methx3.             (0.10)    (0.18) (0.039)

          Ratio    First         All   0.21      -0.76     0.102     0.82    0.008    --    2.2
6.3
                   Differere           (0.18) (0.35) (0.058)

6.4       Ratio    Fair's        All    0.11     -0.66     0.113 0.95        0.006   0.82   2.3
                   Methd               (0.09)    (0.15) (0.037)
6.5        Level   First         Fed -0.17       0.20      -0.017    0.48    70.8     --    1.2
                   Differeme           (0.23) (0.34)       (0.079)

6.6        Level   Fair's        Fed    0.14     -0.33      0.091 0.999 56.1         0.997 1.9
                   Medd                (0.09) (0.15) (0.048)
6.7        Ratio   First         Fed    0.22 -0.81    0.137          0.84    0.008    --    2.4
                   Differere           (0.16) (0.30) (0.064)

6.8        Ratio   Fair's        Fed    0.15 -0.60     0.164 0.95            0.006   0.86 2.4
                   Methid              (0.08) (0.15) (0.045)

*
 The   estsnated equatis ir1t all of      t1a   variables presented in table 1; startard
errors are s&Jwn in parentheses.
shortages, rationing and patriotic appeals to self-restraint
caused an abnormally high rate of saving at the same time that
the government deficit-financed a uniquely massive increase in
defense spending. When those years are excluded from the sample,
Kormendi's results are reversed.
     The estimates presented here show that in the equation
specified by Kormendi, but with the years 1941 through 1946
excluded, increases in tax receipts have had a substantial

negative effect on consumption while increases in government
spending on goods and services have had essentially no effect on
consumption. This evidence is exactly the opposite of the
implications of Ricardian equivalence. This conclusion is robust
with respect to a variety of modifications in the way that the
basic equation is estimated: using an AR1 correction to deal with

serial correlation; limiting the analysis to the Federal
government's fiscal variables; respecifying the variables as
ratios to net national product to reduce collinearity; estimating
for the most recent 35 years instead of for the period since
1931; and using an instrumental variable procedure to reduce the
problem of endogeneity. In each of these specifications, the
results indicate that taxes depress consumer spending while
government outlays on goods and services have either a smaller or

a totally insignificant effect.
     The present study has been limited to an analysis within the
specification used by Kormendi. A different or more general
specification might lead to different conclusions. But the

                                   21
present study has purposely been restricted to the Kormendi
formulation because of the importance that has been attributed to
Kormendi'S evidence. The only proper inference that can be drawn
from the present study is that Kormendi's own conclusion is wrong

and that, within his own specification, the evidence decisively
contradicts the Ricardian equivalence proposition and supports
the conventional view that higher taxes reduce consumption and
that budget deficits caused by tax reductions therefore depress

national saving.

Cambridge, Mass.
July 1987




                               22
                           REFERENCES

Bailey, Martin J., National Income and the Price Level, New York:
     McGraw-Hill, 1971.
Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of
     political Economy, November/December 1974, 82, 1095—1117.

Barth, James R., Iden, George and Russek, Frank S., "Government
     Debt, Government Spending, and Private Sector Behavior:
     Comment," American Economic Review, December 1986, 76,
     1158—67.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of
     Theory and Evidence," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1987, 2,
     forthcoming.
Butkiewicz, James L., "The Market Value of Outstanding Government
     Debt: Comment," Journal of Monetary Economics, May 1983, 11,
     373—80.

Darby, Michael R., Gillingham, Robert and Greenlees, John S.,
     "The Impact of Government Deficits on Personal and National
     Saving Rates," U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of
     the Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy, Research Paper
     No. 8702.

Evans, Paul, "Do Large Deficits Produce High Interest Rates?,"
     American Economic Review, March 1985, 75, 68-87.
Feldstein, Martin S., "Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand,'
     Journal of Monetary Economics, January 1982, 9, 1-20.
Feldstein, Martin S., "The Budget Deficit and the Dollar," NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual, 1986, 1, 355-392.

Granger, C.W.J., and Newbold, Paul, "Spurious Regressions in
     Econometrics," Journal of Econometrics, July 1974, 2, 111-
     120.

Hutchinson, Michael M. and Throop, Adrian W., "U.S. Budget
     Deficits and the Real Value of the Dollar," Economic Review
     of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Fall 1985, 26-
     43.

Kochin, Levis A., "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by Consumers?,"
     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, August 1974, 6, 385-
     94.




                                23
Kormendi, Roger C., "Government Debt, Government Spending, and
     Private Sector Behavior," American Economic Review, December
     1983, 73, 994—1010.
Modigliani, Franco and Sterling, Arlie, "Government Debt,
     Government Spending, and Private Sector Behavior: Comment,"
     American Economic Review, December 1986, 76, 1168-79.

Patinkin, Don, Money, Interest, and Prices, New York: Harper and
     Row, 1965.
Plosser, Charles I., "Government Financing Decisions and Asset
     Returns," Journal of Monetary Economics, May 1982, 9, 325-
     52.

Seater, John J. and Mariano, Roberto S., "New Tests of the Life
     Cycle and Tax Discounting Hypotheses," Journal of Monetary
     Economics, March 1985, 15, 195-215.




                               24
