                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE FARM LABOR FORCE
                              BY REGION, 1820-1860:
                              REVISED ESTIMATES AND
                             IMPLICATIONS FOR GROWTH




                                  Thomas Weiss




                             Working Paper No. 2438




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 1987




A version of this paper was presented at the 1987 annual meeting of the Economic
History Association. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #2438
                                            November 1987



            The Farm Labor Force by Region, 1820-1860:
           Revised Estimates and Implications for Growth

                             ABSTRACT

     This paper sets forth new estimates of the farm labor
force covering the period 1820 to 1860, for the United States
and the major geographic regions. At the national level, the
new figures are noticeably different from the previous
estimates.     In particular, the new estimates lower the 1820
farm labor force by about 8 percent, while raising the
figures for 1840, 1850, and 1860 by 7 to 10 percent. As a
consequence, the farm work force grew more rapidly than was

previously believed, while farm productivity and per capita
income grew more slowly.       The impact of the revisions, of

course, varied by subperiod.
     The new figures also alter our picture of variations in
regional economic performance, the more so in some regions.
In particular, the pace and timing of the shift out of
farming in New England has been changed substantially.
     The     paper   also   discusses     the reasons      for    the

discrepancies between the new and old series, and provides
some assessment of the new evidence.
                                        Thomas Weiss
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of Kansas
                                        Lawrence, KS 66045

                                        (913) 864—3501
     The interpretation of several key issues in U.S. economic
history rests on the size of and changes in the farm labor
force.     The simple description of the course of farm
productivity over the nineteenth century depends on the labor
input, and in turn the time series of farm productivity
influences our understanding of other issues. For the nation,
the rate of economic growth before 1840 depended crucially on
the course of farm labor productivity.        In Paul David's
conjectural estimates of per capita product for that early
period, increases in the farm labor force had a direct effect
on measured farm labor productivity, and an indirect effect, by
assumption, on the rate of advance in nonfarm industries. At
the same time, the labor force estimates determined the
interindustry shifts, and their impact on the overall level of
productivity. At the regional level, the performance of free
and slave based economies, and the effect of the "westward
movement" on the nation's performance was determined to a large
extent by the relative size and efficiency of the region's farm
sectors.   The pace and timing of industrialization in older
states and regions was closely tied to the slower growth and
eventual decline of the farm sector.            Moreover,   our

understanding of these events is determined by the estimates of
the true values of these farm statistics.

     Over the past decade and a half, Robert Gallman has raised
doubts about the extant estimates of the antebellum farm labor
force figures. He first questioned the estimates of per capita

                                1
product in the years before 1840, on the grounds that the
levels of per capita product in the earlier years of the period
seem too low, because they implied implausible values for
nonperishable consumption and investment. Gailman argued that
the conjectures were quite sensitive to David's revisions of
Lebergott's labor force figures for 1800, 'particularly as the
changes affect the distribution of the total between sectors"

(1971, p.81).
     In a subsequent article, Gallman questioned the time
pattern of farm productivity over the nineteenth century
implied by the Lebergott-David labor force estimates.       In

particular, those figures suggested unlikely changes in the
number of hours worked per farm worker; a 28—35 percent
increase in the first half century, and a 13-29 peercent
decline in the second half (1975, p.38).        Moreover, farm
productivity advanced more rapidly in the first half of the
century than in the latter half, a pattern that "runs counter
to the burden of the narrative histories of the period,"
(p.36).   In this instance, Gailman argued that the fault lay
with the 1850 labor force estimates rather than the 1800, and
suggested that the figure for that year was low by as many as

600,000 farm workers, or roughly 12 percent (p.50).
    Whether or not Gailman is precisely correct in identifying
the years in which the labor force figures may be flawed, or
the exact extent of the error, he clearly raised serious
questions about the accuracy of the farm workforce series.

                                2
Because the farm sector was relatively larger in some regions,
and changed in importance at different rates, the biases and
their effects could have varied across regions.
        I am currently preparing new estimates of the farm and
nonf arm labor force by state and region for the period 1800 to
1860.     These data will be linked to a set of figures for the
postbellum period, so the combined series will contain more
industrial and demographic detail than is presently available
at the state and regional level for the entire century. As a
by-product of careful estimation of these figures at the state
level the accuracy of the national totals should be increased.'
        The estimation is not yet complete, so the discussion in

the present paper is confined to four years, 1820, 1840, 1850,
and 1860, for which the census provided some occupational data.
Because the estimates for the remaining years will draw heavily
upon the evidence for these four, it is desirable to establish

their accuracy before proceeding.


METHODS OF ESTIMATION
        For the most part, my estimation follows Lebergott's
approach, but is executed at the state and regional level.2 In
concept and coverage, as well as the levels of the total labor
force, the two series are similar.3        Our estimates of the
antebellum agricultural labor force share in common that they
are based largely on the existing census statistics.      These

census counts were not flawless, but they were collected at

                                 3
specific dates during the antebellum period so represent the
actual state of affairs, capturing the economic realities of
the time. In my work, I have reassessed and revised the census
data for 1820, 1840, 1850 and 1860, producing a clearer picture
of the age-sex coverage of each of those censuses.4        This

information in turn has permitted a more reliable revision of
the labor force data.   In addition, for 1820 and 1840, it is
possible to use the revised census data to estimate the number
of slaves engaged in farming. Let me summarize the key parts
of these assessments and revisions.
     The 1850 and 1860 census counts of workers appear quite
accurate for the nation and most states, but the figures for
several states were extremely flawed.5 For the U.S., the 1850
count of free male workers aged 16 and over was revised upward
by less than one percent, with the Northeast being decreased by

one percent, the South being increased by one percent, and the
North Central being increased by three percent.6      The 1860
published census reported a combined figure for free male and
female workers aged 15 and over, but greater detail can be
found in the manuscript schedules.7 Samples of evidence taken
from the manuscripts suggest that the census figures include a
fairly reliable count of female workers, but some undercounting
of male workers, and that the biases varied by state. In sum,
the U.S. count of free workers was increased by 3.4 percent,
with no change in the Northeast, an increase of 6.9 percent in
the South, 7.4 percent in the North Central, and a decrease of

                               4
5.6 percent in the West.8

     I assessed the 1820 and 1840 censuses in order to
determine which industries were covered, which age and sex
portions of the population were included in the counts of
workers, and which state counts were in need of revision.
Neither census covered all industries, but both reported
figures for agriculture, and for other commodity producing
industries.   However, there appears to be some difference in
age and sex coverage. The 1840 census reported on all workers

aged 10 and over, including slaves, although the accuracy and
completeness varied by county and state.        The 1820 counts
appear to cover free males aged 16 and over, and slaves aged 10
and over, but they, like the 1840 figures, were imperfect.    In

principle, then, we have a count of the entire farm work force
in 1840, and the bulk of it in 1820. In both years, the worst
anomalies in the census figures have been identified and
corrected; in 1820 the reported counts were supplemented by
estimates of the missing components, females aged 16 and over
and free males aged 10 to 15 years.9
     The revisions were carried out by examining the county and
subdivision data, in much the same manner as had been done
before by Richard Easterlin (1960) and Stanley Lebergott
(1966). While the census counts included most slave workers,
they were incomplete so that the farm worker totals in most
slave states had to be revised.        Fortunately, the reported
figures in a large number of counties in the southern states

                               5
were accurate and could be used to correct those in other
counties, as explained below.
     The corrections to the census counts of farm workers
amounted to 97,362 in 1820 and 168,195 in 1840; increases of
4.8 percent and 4.5 percent respectively)-0    The adjustments
varied by region. For 1820, I made virtually no corrections to
the North Central figures, and made the largest change, an
increase of 8.3 percent, in the South Central region.11     In

1840, the New England workforce was reduced by 5.3 percent,
while the largest upward correction was 7.5 percent in the
South Atlantic.
     There are two aspects of my estimation which differ
substantially from the earlier work of Lebergott, Easterlin,
and David.   First, I have increased the farm labor force in
1850 and 1860, and thus indirectly in other antebellum years as
well, by the inclusion in that sector of an estimate of some
number of "laborers, not otherwise specified." Second, I have
produced a different set of estimates of the numbers of slaves
engaged in farming, which is based more heavily on the
available statistics.    The effect of these two factors is
discussed below.


RESULTS
     The new estimates are presented, by region, in Table 1,
along with a set of "previous estimates" for comparison. The
latter are a combination of the estimates of Lebergott, David,


                                6
and Easterlin. In Table 2 the rates of change are presented.


        At the national level, the present figures are higher than
the previous ones in 1840, 1850 and 1860, by a fairly uniform
percentage; 9 percent in 1840, 8 in 1850 and 7 in 1860.12
While the levels of the two series differ, they show roughly
the same growth over the period, as well as over each of the
two decades. This is true for both the absolute increases in
numbers of workers and the percentage changes.

        There are some notable differences at the regional level.
In particular, the present estimates show higher levels of the
farm labor force in all regions in 1840, but not in 1850 and
1860.       In those latter years the new figures        f or the
northeastern regions are similar or below the previous
estimates. In consequence, the shift out of agriculture during
the period 1840 to 1860, in New England and the Middle Atlantic
regions, occurred more rapidly than in the previous series. In
New England the farm labor force declined absolutely in both
decades.     ifl the other regions, the rates of change over each
of the decades are similar in the two series, the most obvious
difference being the slower growth in the North Central region
over the decade of the 1850's.

        In sharp contrast, the new national totals for 1820 are
below the previous figures by approximately 8 percent, but
there is substantial variation across regions. The farm labor
force in both southern regions is higher than the earlier

                                  7
estimates, while the northern figures are below the previous
ones by 15 to 20 percent.      The obvious consequence of these
changes, taken in conjunction with those for the period 1840 to
1860, is much faster growth of the farm labor force between
1820 and 1840, and slower growth of farm labor productivity.
While the farm workforce grows more rapidly now in all regions,
the sharpest difference is in New England, where there is now
an increase rather than a small decline.
     These are rather striking changes in the statistical
record of the United States, and have substantial implications
for our understanding of economic growth before the Civil War.
Why are the new and previous estimates so different, and which
is the more reasonable series?
Differences in 1850 and 1860
     The differences in the 1850 and 1860 values are the
easiest to explain.   In both years, the present estimates are
slightly higher due to a difference in the method of estimating
the number of farm workers aged 10 to 15 years.13    To maintain
consistency with the scope of coverage in other years, the
present figures for 1850 include an estimate of the number of
free females aged 16 and over engaged in f arming.14 The chief
reason for the higher level in the present series, however, is
the allocation of some laborers, not otherwise specified to
farming. This is offset to a substantial extent in both years
by the smaller number of slaves estimated to be engaged in
farming in the present series.       The net effect of these two

                                 8
 factors accounts for 79 percent of the difference in 1850 and
 67 percent in 1860.   It is clear that any judgment about the
different series hinges on the acceptance of these two major
adjustments, the allocation of some laborers to farming and the
different estimate of the share of slaves engaged in farming.'5


     A detailed examination of the census data at the state and
regional level makes clear that the category of workers—
called "laborers, not otherwise specified —   included   some who
must have been engaged in farming in 1850 and 1860.      Previous
researchers recognized this for the postbellum years, but not
for the antebellum period, apparently because the presence of
large numbers of slaves in farming masked the problem at the
national level. When one looks at just the free states, where
slavery could not distort the picture, it is evident that some
of these laborers must have been employed in farming (Weiss,

1987c)
     My allocation of some of these workers to farming raises
that sector's labor force by 625,000 workers, or approximately
15 percent, in 1850; and by 584,000, or 10 percent in 1860)-s
These are not trivial amounts, but seem clearly called for.
Without such laborers, the ratio of the total farm workforce to
rural population in the free states was .15 in 1850 and .159 in
1860, substantially below the average of .192 in the years 1870
through 1910.17   With the addition of these workers, the 1850
and 1860 ratios are .194 and .189 respectively, very much in

                                9
line with the behavior of the ratio in the postbellum yearsJ8
     The other factor of importance bearing on the difference
between the present estimates and those of Lebergott, David and
Easterlin is in the number of slaves engaged in farming.19 In
their figures, the number of slaves engaged in farming was
estimated by assuming that 95 percent of the slave population
aged 10 and over lived in rural areas, 87 to 90 percent of
which were engaged in f arming.2°   In the present estimates I
have placed a smaller share of the rural slaves in farming.21
I used the county level data on employment and population for
1840 to estimate the share of the rural slave population aged
10 and over engaged in farming, and applied this figure to the
1850 and 1860 rural population data to obtain an estimate of
slaves engaged in farming in those years.
     Examination of the county level data indicated that the
census evidence seemed reliable in a large number of counties
in the South; 488 out of 633 in existence at the time. While
the census reported the slave and free populations separately,

it provided only one figure for employment in agriculture,
combining the free and slave workers. These data were used to
estimate a regression equation which would yield the implicit
participation rates for the free and slave components. These
data indicated that only 74 percent of the rural slaves aged 10
and over were engaged in farming.22 As can be readily seen,
this figure differs noticeably from that used by Lebergott and
David. The use of this figure to estimate the number of slaves

                               10
engaged in farming in 1850 and 1860 yields figures that are
smaller than Lebergott and David's by 280,000 in 1850, and
350,000 in 1860.     The farm slave figure implicit in the 1840
Census figure (1,158,000) is 203,000 less than Lebergott's
estimate.23

     The revised figures accord more with what we know about
the other activities in which slaves were engaged.      In the
present series, 16 percent of the rural population aged 10 and
over, (or roughly 18 percent of the rural slave labor force)
was engaged in nonfarm work. This is in stark contrast to the
previous estimate that virtually no rural slaves worked at
nonfarm occupations, a figure much too low, given all the other
activities that took place on the plantation, and in rural
areas more generally.     This, after all, was a time when not
only mining, fishing, and forestry took place in rural areas,
but also much, and perhaps most, of manufacturing, especially
in the South.      The work of Ronald Lewis, John Stealey, and
others indicates clearly that many slaves were employed in
mining, manufacturing, salt extraction, and lumbering, and that
these activities took place to a large extent outside cities.24
Robert Starobin, the author of the most comprehensive study of
industrial slavery claims that "the typical industrial slave
lived in a rural, small-town, or plantation setting, where most

industry was located, not in a large city." (1970, p.11).
    While systematic evidence on the nonfarm occupations of
slaves is harder to compile, the 16 percent figure is quite

                                11
consistent with what we do know. Sample data from plantation
and probate records indicate that 4.2 percent of the male
slaves and 17.6 percent of the female, or an average of 10.9
percent of the rural slaves were engaged as domestic servants
(Olson, 1983). Some of these may have worked part of the time
as field hands, but the nonfield occupation was their primary
one, and is likely the one that would have been reported to the

census taker.    Given the wide range of other tasks to which
slaves were set, the figure for domestic servants seems like a
reasonable lower—bound to the total number engaged in nonfarm

occupations.    If we take account of all the other occupations
that could be construed as nonfarm, an upper bound can be set
at 27 percent of plantation (rural) slaves.25    The 16 percent

figure derived from the county level data falls securely
between the 10.9 and 27 percent.26
Differences in 1840
     The difference of 315,951 in the estimates for 1840 stems
from varying judgments about the inaccuracies of the census
count.   Both series accept that the census counts covered all
the relevant population groups, namely those aged 10 and over,
both free and slave.    The present series reflects a judgment
that the census did not count all the workers in those covered
groups, and raised the census count by 168,195 workers.     The
previous estimate of Lebergott rests on the idea that the
census undercounted in some locations, overcounted in others,
and on balance overcounted.     In consequence the census farm

                                12
 labor force total was reduced by 147,756 workers (1966, pp.152-

55).    Easterlin, in his original work with the 1840 Census,
revised the count upward, although in some states in the
Northeast he reduced it.      In his subsequent work he accepted
Lebergott's farm totals, and thus implicitly the notion that
the census count was too high, but gave no reasons for his
change of mind.

       In my assessment of the census, I judged each state
individually, and found that in some the count was too high,
but in most it was too low, especially in the South.    It is in
this region that the crucial difference arises, for Lebergott
argued 'that the Census enumeration must have counted all
slaves aged ten and over in rural areas as engaged in
agriculture" (1966, p.152).     He estimated the free farm work
force as a residual by subtracting the entire rural slave
population aged 10 and over from the census count of
agriculture.   Separately, he calculated the slave farm labor
force, as 90 percent of the rural slave population aged 10 and
over, and combined this smaller slave figure with the residual
estimate of the free farm workers to obtain his revised total.
The free workforce of 2,160,000, however, appears too low. The
ratio of that figure to the free rural population is only .168,
noticeably below the .208 ratio implied by his free farm
workforce estimate for 1820, and below that (.192) which
prevailed in the free states in the period 1870 to 1910.27
Moreover, the ratio for the free northern states, based on the

                                 13
reported census statistics, was .21, while the free southern
ratio, derived by deducting the slave labor force from the
reported totals, is only .07.28
Differences in 1820
     The difference of 181,000 between the present and previous
estimates for 1820 is a little harder to explain because I did
not make explicit, separate adjustments to the free farm or
slave workforces that can be compared to Lebergott's estimate.
However, for illustrative purposes we can look at the numbers
implicit in my revised farm totals for each of these population

components.
     The larger difference lies in the number of slaves engaged
in farming, 127,000 fewer in the present series. The Census
did not separate free and slave workers, and I did not make an
explicit estimate of either, but by following the same
procedures used for 1840 to estimate a regression equation from

the cross-sectional data for a subset of counties in which the
census counts seemed reliable, I calculated an implied share of
79 percent of the rural slave population aged 10 and over
engaged in farming.   This means that 788,000 or 87 percent of
the rural slave workforce was in farming.             In contrast,
Lebergott allocated the entire rural slave work force to
agriculture (915,000 slaves).          As noted earlier, the lower
figure is much more consistent with other evidence about the
nonfarm activities in which rural slaves were engaged.
     If we deduct these slave counts from the farm totals, we

                                  14
obtain free residuals of 1,500,000 in the present series and
1,553,000 in the Lebergott series.    While there is a smaller
discrepancy between these two figures than showed up in the
slave comparison, the derivation of the free workforce reveals
some reasons behind the overall difference. We both increased
the total labor force by approximately the same amount in 1820;

688,000 in the present case, 644,000 in the previous series,
but Lebergott allocated a substantially larger number to
farming, 246,000 versus 400,000.29 His allocation was based on
the distribution of the workers among the subset of industries
reported in the Census, from which he calculated that 83
percent of the free males were employed in farming. Since part
of the deficiency in the total labor force was due to the
census's   failure to report employment in the service
industries, the share of the total revision going to
agriculture should be smaller than that found in the reported

figures.   Moreover, the inclusion of slave workers in the
reported figures gives an upward bias to the farm share3° In
the present figures, I have not made an explicit estimate of
the adjustment to the free farm workforce, but my total
correction to the Census agricultural figure of 246,000 is 36
percent of the revision to the entire labor force.31
     An overall assessment of the two series can be
accomplished by comparing the labor force figures to changes in
the rural population. This is done in Tables 2 and 3. At the
national level, the two labor force series show similar

                               15
percentage changes relative to the rural population growth over
the decades of the 1840's and 1850's. Over the period 1820 to
1840, however, the behavior of the present estimates is far
more consistent with the percentage changes in rural
population. The present series also appears more reasonable if
compare shifts in the farm share of the labor force with shifts

in the rural share of the population (Table 3).      The rural

share of the population declined by 4 percentage points between
1820 and 1840, and 10 percentage points between 1840 and 1860.
The previous estimates show a rather large decline in the farm
share of 16 percentage points between 1820 and 1840, and a
decrease of 10 percentage points over the next 20 years.     In

the present estimates, the decline over the period 1820 to 1840

was 5 percentage points, followed by an 11 point decrease
between 1840 and 1860. The two series show comparable behavior
over the latter twenty years, but in the earlier period, the
previous estimates yield a change far out of line with that for

rural population.
Implications
     One of the most obvious implications of the new figures is
that the levels of output per worker in farming in the late
antebellum period were lower than previously believed.   (Table

4)   This is true for the nation, as well as each region, with
the sole exception of New England in 1860. Among regions, the
output per worker figures have been lowered the most in the
South Atlantic and South Central regions.    The South Central

                               16
region is still one of the most productive, but its edge over
the North Central and Middle Atlantic has been reduced in 1840,
and eliminated in 1850 and 1860.

     At the national level, the growth in output per worker is
similar in the two series. The southern regions show virtually

identical changes, in spite of the relatively large differences
in levels, while the Middle Atlantic and North Central regions
now show somewhat faster rates of productivity growth.      The
most striking disparity is in the growth of output per worker
in the New England region, where the new figures show a 12.7
percent increase over the entire 20 year period, in contrast to
virtually no growth in Easterlin's figures.
     For the period before 1840 we can calculate output per
worker figures only at the national level because regional farm
output data are lacking.            According to Paul David's
estimates, farm labor productivity increased by 31 percent
between 1820 and 1840 (1967, Table 6).        The index of farm
output he used to derive the productivity estimate was
constructed independent of his labor force figures, so can be
used with the present series to obtain the result that farm
labor productivity increased by only 11 percent over the twenty
year period.32
     These alterations in the pace of farm productivity change
extend to the behavior of per capita income. David's original
conjectural estimates showed a growth of per capita income of
approximately 2 percent per year between 1820 and 1840,

                               17
somewhat higher than the 1.6 percent rate that occurred over

the subsequent 20 years.       Using the present labor force
estimates, the conjectural growth between 1820 and 1840 was .9

percent per year.     The revised rate falls below that of the
following decades, and leaves open the possibility of a gradual
acceleration in the growth of per capita income during the
antebellum period.
     The level of per capita product implicit in the revised
conjecture is $76 in 1820, which is 25 percent above David's

figure.33   This higher level passes Gallrnan's test of the
reasonableness   of   the implicit flow of non-perishable
consumption and investment spending (1971, Table 4).       After

subtracting Galiman's estimate of the flow of perishable
consumption, $43 in 1820, the residual of $33 seems quite
plausible in comparison to the           $46   of non-perishable
consumption that occurred in 1840.      By way of contrast, the
implicit non-perishable figure in David's estimate is only $18.

     With the new figures the effect of the regional
redistribution of farming is not very important, even less so
than was found by Easterlin.34          The impact of regional
redistribution can be guaged by calculating hypothetical values
of the 1860 national average output per worker and comparing
them to the actual 1840 figure.      In one calculation we weight

the 1840 regional productivity figures by the 1860 shares of
the farm labor force, while in a second approach we multiply
the 1840 regional shares of the labor force by the 1860 values

                                18
of output per worker. The first measure reflects the impact of
the regional redistribution, and shows an increase of only $3
above the 1840 figure, while the second, which captures the
effect of intraregional productivity advance, is $27 higher.
The latter effect clearly dominates the overall change,
accounting for 90 percent of the improvement.35
     We can speculate as well on the impact of interregional
movement in the period before 1840, by assuming that there had
been no changes in productivity within each region between 1820
and 1840, but that farming activity had relocated as it did.
The result is that regional redistribution alone would have
raised national output per worker by only $6, or a mere 3.3
percent.36    This slight positive effect of interregional
redistribution is nonetheless larger than the $3 change that
occurred over the period 1840 to 1860, just the reverse of
Easterlin's finding.37 While the effect of redistribution was
not important in either period, it appears to have been
relatively more important in the earlier one.     If farm labor
productivity increased by only 11 percent between 1820 and
1840, then the redistributive effect accounts for 30 percent of
that increase, making it three times as important as it was in
the subsequent 20 years.
     One of the things that stands out in the present figures,
especially in comparison to the previous estimates is the
picture of agricultural change in New England.    The pace and
timing of the shift out of farming, and the relative changes in

                               19
farm productivity, have been altered.           According to the
previous estimates the region showed an absolute decline over
the period 1820 to 1840, then virtual stability over the
1840's, and a subsequent, but small, absolute decline in the
1850's. Now, it appears that the region shifted out of farming
a bit more slowly between 1820 and 1840, and more rapidly
thereafter. In the first period the farm labor force increased
by 22.6 percent, although the sector's share still declined
substantially from 65 percent to 54 percent. In the subsequent
decades the farm share declined even more noticeably, falling
to 39 percent in 1850 and 31 percent in 1860.
     For the period 1840 to 1860, New England was still one of

the least productive farm areas, with an output per worker
figure well below that in all other regions, except the South
Atlantic. But the more rapid shift out of farming during these

decades,   is   reflected in a more favorable picture of
productivity change. According to the Easterlin data, the New
England states had the smallest advance in productivity over
the entire 20 years from 1840 to 1860. Now the region shows a
rate of productivity advance in excess of that in the South
Atlantic and nearly equal to that of the South Central states.
     This pattern of change ties in well with more traditional
views of New England's agriculture. While the opening of the
Erie Canal had a serious impact on farming in the region, the
more devastating effect followed upon the completion and
extension of the railroad network (See Field, 1978 and Russell,

                               20
 1976).     In the words of Percy Bidwell, 'the establishment of
through railroad connection with the West between 1840 and 1850
marked not the beginning, but the culmination of growing
pressure on New England producers from cheaper outside sources
of supply.      (1921, p.689).            There is disagreement about the
exact     timing       of     the   region's     shift    towards   greater
commercialization of agriculture, but surely the process was
hastened by the opening of the Erie Canal, manifesting itself
in important changes in the mix, and locus, of farm production

(Bidwell,      1921,        pp.686-689;     Rothenberg,   1981).     These
decisions, perhaps especially that to alter the mix of output
can be viewed as attempts to capture a part of the region's
burgeoning urban market for farm goods. Such efforts could not
fend off indefinitely the flood of products from western New
York, and the states of the Northwest territory, especially
after the improvements in rail connections, and after 1840,
those farmers' sons who wished to continue farming migrated
West, rather than carry on with the unpromising ventures in New

England. Of course, many left farming all together. (Bidwell,
1921, p.700).


CONCLUS IONS

     This paper has set forth new estimates of the farm labor
force covering the period 1820 to 1860, for the United States
and the major geographic regions. These national and regional
figures are based on state estimates. The original intent of

                                          21
the estimation was to produce state and regional series that
were consistent with the existing national series.      However,
examination of the individual state data produced revisions
which

yielded national figures noticeably different from the previous
estimates.      In particular, the new estimates lower the 1820
farm labor force by about 8 percent, while raising the figures
for 1840, 1850, and 1860 by 7 to 9 percent.
        These differences in the sizes of the farm workforces are
due largely to three factors.     In all years the new estimates
incorporate a smaller number of slaves in farming, roughly 75
percent of the rural slave population of working age as opposed
to the previous estimate of nearly 90 percent.       In 1850 and
1860 this downward bias is more than offset by the addition to
farming of workers who had reported their occupation as
"laborer, not otherwise specified."       Previous estimates had
placed all these workers in nonfarm industries, but careful
examination of the state data, and the location of many of
these workers in rural areas, argues for the assignment of many
of them to farming. In 1820 and 1840 the new estimates differ
from the older ones because of varying judgments about how to
correct the census deficiencies. In 1840, I raised the census
count of farm workers by about 5 percent, while Lebergott
reduced it by about the same margin.          For 1820, we both
increased the census count of the total labor force by
approximately the same amount, but Lebergott allocated nearly

                                 22
twice as many of these added workers to agriculture. Since the
original census count was low primarily because of the
exclusion of workers in the service industries, a large
allocation to farming seems inappropriate.
     As a consequence of these changes, the farm work force
grew more rapidly than was previously believed, which implies
that farm productivity and per capita income grew more slowly.
The impact of the revisions varied by subperiod. For the later
decades, 1840 to 1860, the size of the sector is larger, but
there is little alteration in the pace of growth at the
national or regional level.     However, we now find a higher
level of farm productivity and of per capita income in 1820,
and a slower growth in these variables over the ensuing twenty

years.
     This paper has not addressed the regional differences to
any great extent. While the original intent of the estimation
was to develop the state and regional figures, the alterations
to the national figures were so substantial as to warrant
immediate attention. It is clear, however, that our picture of
regional variation must change, the more so in some regions.
In particular, the pace and timing of the shift out of farming
in New England, and changes in farm productivity there vis-a-
vis other regions, have been altered substantially.    It now
appears that the region shifted out of farming more slowly
between 1820 and 1840, but quite rapidly thereafter.

     The striking differences between the present and previous

                               23
series, and their implications for our understanding of the
path of American economic development, certainly raise some
questions. However, the revised series is more consistent with
changes in the rural population, and so seems more secure than
the older estimates. This in turn gives a measure of credence
to the altered picture of growth presented here. Clearly, both
the estimates and the substantive issues warrant further
examination.




                              24
     This paper has benefitted from discussions with the
participants of the National Bureau of Economic Research's
Summer Institute on the Development of the American Economy,
and from the comments of Jeremy Atack, Lou Cain, Stanley
Engerman, Peter Fearon, Robert Gailman, Claudia Goldin, and
Warren Whatley.    The work has been funded by the National
Science Foundation (Grant No. SES8308569).

                           FOOTNOTES



1.   In all this work I am proceeding on the assumption that the
census counts of population are accurate, or at least equally
reliable at the various census dates.   Several researchers have
concluded that the census undercounted population in the
particular years and localities they have studied.       Since my
labor force estimates are derived as the product of age-sex—state
specific participation rates times the population component, it
would be straightforward to adjust my labor force estimates to
conform to any revised population levels, should reliable
estimates of these undercounts be produced.
     Coale and Zelnick (1963) have argued that the population
enumerations in the postbellum period (actually since 1855) have
been low, but so far, the evidence of underenumeration in the
antebellum censuses pertains to specific places, and it is not
known whether the entire census in any year, much less all years,
was subject to the same degree of error. (See Steckel, 1987, for a
summary of the case studies pertaining to the antebellum years.)
     More troublesome, is the possibility that the undercount fell
more heavily on certain population groups which held a
disproportionate share of selected occupations, thus giving a
relatively larger undercount of the number of workers in those
occupations in the census figures (Sharpless and Shortridge,
1975).
2.   The total labor force is the sum of the workers in five
population components; free males aged 16 and over, free females
aged 16 and over, free males aged 10 to 15, free females aged 10
to 15, and slaves aged 10 and over. The estimate of the number of
workers in each group is the product of the population in the
group times the group-specific participation rate.
     My labor force estimates are based on the concepts and
coverage used by the decennial censuses of the 19th century. They
are more precisely termed "gainful worker' counts, and are known
                               25
to exclude workers engaged in certain types of activities,
especially married women working as boardinghouse keepers or
unpaid family farm workers.    Goldin has produced an estimate of
these omissions for 1890 (1986, Table 10.5). As yet, there are no
such estimates for other years which would permit an adjustment of
the census data to a comparable coverage over time, so I have not
corrected in any year for these sorts of omissions.

3.   The national totals produced from the state estimates differ
only slightly from Lebergott's figures, or from my estimates of
the national totals (Lebergott, 1966, Table 1; Weiss, 1986, Table
1).   The state-based estimates are within two percent of the
national estimates in all years except 1800.   In that year, the
state-based figure of 1,712,000 is virtually identical to David's
estimate (David, 1967, Table A-i).
4.    This work is described in several working papers titled "The
Assessment and Revision of the Antebellum Census Labor Force
Statistics: Part I (1850 and 1860), Part II (1840), and Part III
(1820)."
5. To a large extent these assessments are based on the behavior
of the labor force statistics relative to population. As noted
earlier, I am proceeding on the assumption that the census counts
of population are accurate, or at least equally reliable at the
various census dates.
6.    In both 1850 and 1860 I adjusted the census counts from
their reported coverage of those aged 15 and over to the smaller
base of those aged 16 and over.   The percentage changes reported
here are based on the count that has been adjusted to cover those
aged 16 years and over.
7.    So far I have used only the sample for rural northern
households (Bateman and Foust,1973).     Additional samples have
been taken recently of urban households, but as yet I have not
made use of them (Noen, 1987; Weiss, 1987).
8.    These adjustments were estimated for the total reported
labor force. I assumed that each occupation should be revised by
the same percentage as the total in each state.

9.   No estimate of female farm workers aged 10 to 15 was made
for 1820 or for any other antebellum year. Some of these workers
may be included in the 1840 and 1860 census counts, but the
number must be very small.   The available evidence for the
postbellum period shows very few such workers.
10.   My assessment of the 1840 Census indicated that the
reported labor force in the covered industries was low by about
300,000 workers, and that this undercount was largest in the
South (161,000), but was also substantial in the Northeast
                                26
 (128,000). Ny procedures for revision produced a correction of
206,000 workers, 168,000 of which were in farming.        By
comparison, Easterlin increased the census figure by 104,000
 (1966,   p.127).     He allocated the entire adjustment to
agriculture, so our adjustments to that sector's workforce are
less disparate.

11. These corrections are exclusive of subsequent additions of
male workers aged 10 to 15 and females aged 16 and over.
Moreover, I did correct the North Central figures for an error of
addition in the census totals. The sum of the county figures for
Indiana gives an agricultural workforce of only 31,074, not the
published figure of 61,315.    The smaller figure is much more
reasonable given the size and composition of the state's
population.
12. In his analysis of agricultural productivity change, Galiman
argued that the existing estimate of the farm labor force for
1850 was low, perhaps by as much as 12 percent, or 600,000
workers (1975, p.50). The present estimates are much closer to
the level that Gallman thinks would be consistent with our other
knowledge about the course of productivity change over the
nineteenth century.
13. This factor accounts for a difference of 31,000 in 1850 and
17,000 in 1860.    Lebergott estimated the number of free males
aged 10 to 15 in farming as 17 percent of the population (1966,
pp.152-53). I have assumed that all males aged 10 to 15 years in
the rural labor force were in farming.      For the nation, this
means that approximately 21 percent of the rural male population
aged 10 to 15 was in farming, and that the national percentage
declined over time with urbanization.      The two methods would
yield equal numbers when the urban share of the population was 20
percent, which occurred around 1860.      In that year, the two
estimates are quite close, being within 5 percent of each other.
     Since my procedure relied on participation rates specific to
each state, the estimation of this group of farm workers has
differential effects across regions.    The number of such males
would be lower in New England, and higher in the South, in the
present series than is implicit in the previous estimates.
14. This estimate raised the present farm labor force figure by
61,495 in 1850. The Census of 1860 included free females aged 16
and over in the count of farm workers, and it appears that they
were also included in the Census count for 1840, thus an estimate
seems called for in 1850 in order to have consistent coverage
over time.   My estimate is based on sample data taken from the
manuscript schedules of the 1860 census. That evidence indicates
that 1.5 percent of the females aged 16 and over were engaged in
farming in the North Central region, and .7 percent in the
Northeast (Bateman and Foust, 1973).    I assumed that the larger
figure of 1.5 percent applied to the South.

                               27
15.  I also adjusted the original census data in order to obtain
a figure covering only those aged 16 and over. The 15 year olds
removed by this adjustment were subsequently included in the
independent estimate of those workers aged 10 to 15.           In
addition, some individual state counts were corrected in each
year. (See Weiss, l986b) The net effect of these adjustments and
corrections lowered the original census figures by 38,000 in 1850
and raised them by 71,000 in 1860.
     There is also a small unexplained discrepancy between the
present and previous estimates in each year, 21,000 in 1850 and
46,000 in 1860.

16. My method of allocating this group of unspecified laborers
rests on the idea that there was a strong relationship between
urban and nonf arm occupations, including nonfarm laborers. The
Census of 1910 reported the number of unspecified laborers
according to their industry of employment. For earlier years, I
distributed the reported number of laborers between farm and
nonfarm industries according to the 1910 proportions adjusted for
changes in urbanization. (See Weiss, 1987c, for details.)
     The adjustment varies by region, with the Northeastern farm
workforce being increased by 314,000 (24 percent), the North
Central by 155,000 (15 percent) and the South by 148,000 (5
percent) in 1850; and by 195,000 (15 percent), 202,000 (12
percent) and 158,000 (5 percent) respectively in 1860.
17. The ratio is fairly steady as well, .183 in 1870, .199 in
1880, .203 in 1890, .193 in 1900, and .182 in 1910.
18. The adjustment also yields a more believable estimate of the
number of laborers, not otherwise specified in nonfarni
industries.  If all the reported laborers were allocated to
nonf arm industries the ratio of such laborers to urban population
would be substantially greater in 1850 and 1860 than in
postbellum years.   The ratios would be .257 in 1850 and .156 in
1860 compared to the postbellum average of .075.     The revised
ratios are .063 and .075.

19.   Implicitly there is a difference between my estimate of
slaves in farming in 1840 and Easterlin's original estimate.
While we both relied primarily on the census data, I revised the
census figures for the South upward by more than he did; 148,000
versus 41,000. (Easterlin, 1960, p.127). In a subsequent article
Easterlin adopted Lebergott's national totals, so the comparison
discussed in the text pertain to those figures (Easterlin, 1975,
p.110).
20. Lebergott's explanation indicated that he intended to
allocate only 87 percent of the rural adult. slaves to farming,
but in the execution the 90 percent figure was used. In 1860, he
                               28
used a different figure altogether, namely the participation
rates for free males aged 15 and over.
21. A minor difference is that I have estimated directly the
urban and rural slave populations aged 10 and over.

22. The equation was fit to the cross-sectional evidence for 488
counties, and had a high R-squared (.952), and the coefficient was
highly significant.     Moreover, the coefficient for the free
population aged 10 and over was .337, quite close to the values of
.322 and .333 which prevailed in the rural South in 1850 and 1860.
It is also close to the ratio which prevailed in the free northern
states in 1840, .306 using the original census data, .312 with the
revised figures.
23. A similar procedure was followed in 1820, and a regression
equation estimated for that year as well. That equation gave the
result that the share of the rural slaves aged 10 and over in
farming was 77 percent, slightly above the 1840 figure, but still
well below the 90 percent figure underlying the previous
estimates.  I have used the 1840 coefficient to estimate the farm
slaves in 1850 and 1860 because that date is closer in time to the
years in question, the sample size used in 1840 is much larger
than the 1820, 488 counties versus 274, and as noted above, the
estimated coefficient for the free population in 1840 was close to
the expected value and gives us some confidence in the estimated
value for the slave population.
24. A useful ccllection of pertinent articles can be found in
Newton and Lewis (1978).
25.  In addition to servants, 12.9 percent of the male slaves
worked as artisans, such as blacksmiths, carpenters, millers,
sawyers,   masons,   shoemakers, tailors, engineers, and even
sailmakers;    9.6 percent of the female slaves were engaged in
cloth production (seamstresses, spinners and weavers); 6.2 of the
males worked in a category titled livestock and transportation,
which included carriage and cart drivers, teamsters, and wagoners;
and finally 2.1 of the males and 1.4 of the females were
classified as semi-skilled, which included many farm occupations,
but also mill workers, fishermen, and watchmen.
26.  In an earlier work I estimated the number of slaves working
in service jobs by using a small sample of plantation records
(1975, p.99).   After deducting an estimate of urban domestics,
that evidence indicated that approximately 16 percent of the rural
slaves aged 10 and over worked at service tasks in the period 1840
to 1860.
      The evidence from interviews with ex-slaves shows higher
percentages were engaged in household tasks (Crawford, 1980).


                               29
27. Lebergott judged the 1840 ratio in comparison to that for
1850 (.16), and found it reasonable. However, that ratio, as well
as the 1860 figure, is too low because he did not allocate any
laborers, not otherwise specified, to agriculture.
28. Lebergott has argued that the rural population figures are
suspect becuase there is no reason to believe that the census
counted the urban population accurately (1966, p.154).   On the
other hand, in his approach we must accept that they accurately
counted and classified farmers and farm laborers. The presence
of large numbers of laborers, not otherwise specified, and the
fact that farmers and farm laborers were reported as one
occupation in 1850 suggests they had their difficulties in
classifying those workers.

29. This difference of 154,000 leaves a discrepancy of 27,000
between the two series, which is explained primarily by the
correction of an arithmetical error in the census count for
Indiana.   A few minor changes were made in the figures for
several other states.

30.  If we deduct Lebergott's estimate of the number of slaves in
farming from the census counts of workers in farming and in all
reported industries combined, the remainder of free farm workers
to the remaining workers in all reported industries, is only 73
percent.   This smaller share would result in 48,000 fewer free
workers being allocated to farming.
31.  I did make an estimate of the number of males aged 10 to 15
and females aged 16 and over employed in farming, but the males
aged 16 and over were combined with the slaves in the census
count.
     If females are excluded, the farm correction is 48 percent
of the total workforce revision.
32. The two labor force series imply similar percentage
increases in productivity over the subsequent twenty years; 21
percent using David's figures and 23 percent with the present
estimates.

33. The per capita income figure derived using David's labor
force estimates is $61. Both his and the revised income figures
use the 1840 value of Gross Domestic Product per capita ($91)
derived from David's original work, and estimate the 1820 values
by multiplying that figure by the growth index number. The index
numbers were calculated using the conjectural growth equation
developed by David (1967, p.161).   See Gallman (1971, Table 1)
for a discussion of the estimates of the per capita gross
domestic product derived from David's calculations.



                               30
34. Easterlin found that productivity growth within regions
accounted for about two-thirds of the increase in output per
worker between 1840 and 1860, and regional redistribution,
explained the rest of the increase. He computed a hypothetical
1860 output per worker figure for the nation by using the actual
1860 productivity figures for each region, and assuming that the
distribution of the farm labor force was the same as had existed
in 1840. The difference between this hypothetical figure and the
actual national output per worker measured the contribution of
intra-regional productivity change.   He ascribed the balance to
the effect of regional redistribution towards higher productivity
regions (1975, p.97).
35. The sum of the two hypothetical changes amounts to $30, while
the actual increase that occurred between 1840 and 1860 was $35
(Table 3).  The difference is due largely to the exclusion of the
West from the present calculation. A small part of the difference
is the interaction effect that occurs in these index number
calculations, and which is usually assumed to be distributed
across the factors in proportion to their importance in the
explained change.
36. Paul David estimated that the regional shift would have
increased average agricultural output per worker by 3.6 percent
between 1820 and 1840. This is roughly 12 percent of the total
improvement in farm labor productivity that occurred in the 20
years (1967, pp.l78—79).
37. Easterlin found that the effect in the period 1840 to 1860
was nearly as large as that for the entire 40 years before 1840,
and nearly twice as large as the increase from 1820 to 1840
(1975, Table 1 and p.97).




                               31
                                TABLE 1
                  FARM LABOR FORCE ESTIMATES BY REGION

REGION               1820        1840         1850     1860

         Present Estimates

New England         317707       389412      369459    348576
Mid Atlantic        570276       854798      915552    969989
No.Central          183904       710156     1056276   1666187
So.Atlantic         805401      1024829     1227792   1403780
So.Central          411218       906756     1288766   1778946
West                        0           0     24944    120570

United States      2288506      3885951     4882790   6288049


         Previous Estimates

New England         377910      367200       369400    364400
Mid Atlantic        716300      820100       903000    965800
No.Central          214890      660800      1000600   1640900
So.Atlantic         778050      907400      1064500   1240300
So.Central          382850      814500      1155700   1592700
West                                          26700     76100

United States      2470000      3570000     4519900   5880200



Notes to Table 1
     Delaware and Maryland are included in the Middle
Atlantic region.
     The construction of the Present Estimates is described
somewhat in the text.    More detailed descriptions of the
procedures may be obtained from the author.
     The Previous Estimates are from the work of Lebergott,
Easterlin, and David.    The U.S. totals are from Lebergott
(1966, Table 1).    The regional figures for 1840, 1850 and
1860 are from Easterlin (1975, Table B-i). He distributed
Lebergott totals among the various regions, so the regional
and national figures are consistent.   The regional figures
for 1820 were obtained by distributing Lebergott's total
according to the regional shares estimated by David (1967,
Appendix Table II).
                                   TABLE 2
          COMPARISON OF CHANGES IN THE RURAL POPULATION
                AND THE FARM LABOR FORCE ESTIMATES
                        Percentage Changes
REGION                  RURAL          FARM LABOR FORCE ESTIMATES
                      POPULATION          PRESENT     PREVIOUS

     A.    1820 to 1840

NEW ENGLAND              20.7             22.6        -    2.8
MID ATLANTIC             44.8             49.9         14.5
NO.CENTRAL              279.0            286.2        207.5
SO.ATLANTIC              27.3             27.2         16.6
SO.CENTRA.L             114.0            120.5        112.7

UNITED STATES             68.2               69.8         44.5


     B. 1840 to 1850
NEW ENGLAND                  8.0         -    5.1          0.6
MID ATLANTIC              17.6                7.1         10.1
NO.CENTRAL                52.2               48.7         51.4
SO.ATLANTIC               17.8               19.8         17.3
SO.CENTRAL                40.4               42.1         41.9

UNITED STATES             28.1               25.7         26.6


     C.       1850 to 1860

NEW ENGLAND                2.2           -    5.7     -    1.4
MID ATLANTIC              10.2                5.9          7.0
NO.CENTRAL                58.8               57.7         64.0
SO.ATLANTIC               12.3               14.3         16.5
SO.CENTRAL                32.2               38.0         37.8

UNITED STATES             26.6               28.8         30.1


Source:   Table 1 above;   U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975,
Historical Statistics of the United States, Series A:195—209.
                                 TABLE 3
                 SHARES AND CHANGES IN SHARES
         OF THE FARM LABOR FORCE AND RURAL POPULATION
                          BY REGION

     Panel A:    Percentage Shares
                    Farm Labor Force              Rural Poulation
REGION            1820 1840 1850 1860           1820 1840 1850 1860

New England          65   54      39   31         90    81        71   63
Mid Atlantic         61   54      42   35         89    81        74   64
No. Central          82   77      67   62         99    96        91   86
So .Atlantic         77   74      74   72        99     96        95   94
So. Central          86   77      75   74        99     95        93   92

United States                                    94     89        84   79
 Present LF          72   67      60   56
 Previous LF         79   63      55   53



     Panel B:   Changes in Shares

                    Farm Labor Force           Rural Population
                 1820     1840     1850      1820    1840    1850
                to 1840   to 1850    to 1860   to 1840 to 1850 to
1860
New England      -   11        - 15    -    8      —9        —    10   —    8
Mid Atlantic     -             - 12    -          —8         —         —10
No.Central       -    7
                      5        - 10    -
                                            7
                                            5     —3         —
                                                                   7
                                                                   5   —    5
So.Atlantic      -    3         --     —    2     —3         —     1   —    1
So.Central       -    9        - 2     -    1     —4         —     2   —    1

United States                                     —5         -.    5   —    5
 PresentLF       -    5     -    7     -4
 Previous LF     -   16     -    8     -    2




Sources:   Table 1 above and new estimates of the total labor
force by region; Lebergott, 1966, Table 1; U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 1975, Historical Statistics of the United States.
Series A:195—09.
                           TABLE 4
           AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT PER WORKER, BY REGION
                      1840, 1850, AND 1860
                  (Valued in 1879 U.S. Prices)

                 Present Estimates     Easterlin's Estimates
Region           1840   1850   1860     1840   1850   1860

New England       165    146    186      175   146     177
Mid Atlantic      206    203    241      214   206     242
No.Central        201    207    238      216   218     242
So.Atlantic       148    149    160      167   172     181
So.Central        208    197    238      232   220     265

United States     186    184    219      203   199     234


          Indexes of Relative Productivity

New England        89     79     85      86     73        76
Mid ATlantic      111    110    110     105    104     103
No.Central        108    113    109     106    110     103
So.Atlantic        80     81     73      82     86      77
So.Central        111    107    109     114    111     113

United States    100    100    100      100    100     100




Sources: Easterlin, 1975, Table B-i; and Table 1 above.
     In both series, the numerator used in the calculation is
Easterlin's figures for agricultural income by region, so any
differences in the productivity ratio are due entirely to the
labor force estimates.
                                   TABLE 5

      PERCENTAGE CHANGES IN AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT PER WORKER
                    BY REGION - 1840 TO 1860

               1840 TO 1850           1850 TO 1860   1840 TO 1860
Region          New    Old             New    Old     New    Old

New England    —11.5 —16.6             27.1   21.2   12.7     1.1
Mid Atlantic   —   1.5   —   3.7       18.6   17.5   17.0    13.1
No. Central        3.0       1.1       15.6   11.0   18.4    12.0
So .Atlantic        .7       3.0        7.6    5.2    8.1     8.4
So .Central    —   5.3   —   5.2       20.5   20.4   14.4    14.2

United States — 1.1      -   2.0       19.2   17.6   17.7    15.3



Source: Table 4, above.
     The increase for the U.S. can exceed that in each region,
as is shown in the last column, due to the effect of a shift of
the   industry   towards   regions  with higher     levels   of
productivity.
                        SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Atack, Jeremy and Bateman, Fred. 1986. To Their Own   Soil.   Ames:
Iowa State University Press.

Bateman, Fred and Foust, James. 1973.       'Agricultural and
Demographic Records of 21,118 Rural Households'    Data Tape,
Indiana University.

Bidwell, Percy. 1921. "The Agricultural Revolution in New
England," American Historical Review, Vol.26. pp.683-702.
Carson, Daniel. 1949. "Changes in the Industrial Composition of
Manpower Since the Civil War," Studies in Income and Wealth.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Coale, Ansley and Zelnick, Melvin. 1963. New Estimates of
Fertility and Population in the United States.  Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Danhof, Clarence. 1969. Change in Agriculture. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

David, Paul. 1967. 'The Growth of Real Product in the United
States Before 1840: New Evidence, Controlled Conjectures,"
Journal of Economic History, vol.27, No.2, 151-197.
Easterlin, Richard. 1960. "Interregional Differences in Per
Capita Income, Population, and Total Income, 1840-1950," in
Studies in Income and Wealth, vol.24. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

_________    1975.    "Farm Production and Income in Old and New
Areas at Mid-Century," in Klingaman and Vedder, 1975.
Edwards, Alba. 1940. Comparative Occupation Statistics for the
United States, 1870-1940. 16th Census Report.

Fabricant,   Solomon.   1949.      "The  Changing   Industrial
Distribution of Gainful    Workers: Comments on the Decennial
Statistics, 1820-1940," in Studies in Income and Wealth, 11,
pp 1-49. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Field,   Alexander.     1978.   "Sectoral Shift in Antebellum
Massachusetts: A Reconsideration," Explorations in Economic
History, Vol.15, pp.146—171.
Galiman, Robert. 1971. "The Statistical Approach: Fundamental
Concepts Applied to History," in G.R.Taylor and L.F.Ellsworth,
eds. Approaches to American Economic History. Charlottesville:
The University Press of Virginia.
_________      1975.    "The Agricultural Sector and the Pace of
Economic Growth: U.S. Experience in the Nineteenth Century," in
Klingaman and Vedder, 1975.
Goldin, Claudia. 1986. "The Female Labor Force and American
Economic Growth, 1890-1980," in Studies in Income and Wealth,
vol. 51. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Klingaman,     David and Vedder, Richard.           1975.   Essays   in
Nineteenth Century Economic History. Athens: Ohio University
Press.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1964 Manpower in Economic Growth. New York:
McGraw-Hi 11

_____________ 1966. "Labor Force and Employment, 1800-1960"
in Studies in income and Wealth, vol. 34, 117204. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Miller, A. and Brainerd, C. 1957.  "Labor Force Estimates," in
Everett Lee,   et.al., Population Redistribution and Economic
Growth. Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society.
Newton, James and Lewis, Ronald. 1978. The Other Slaves.
Boston: G.K. Hall & Co.
Olson, John. 1983. "The Occupational Structure of Plantation
Slave Labor in the Late Antebellum Era."  Ph.D dissertation,
University of Rochester.
Rothenberg, Winifred. 1981. "The Market and Massachusetts
Farmers, 1750-1855," Journal of Economic History, XLI, pp.283-
314.

Russell, Howard. 1976. A Long, Deep Furrow. Hanover, N.H.:
University Press of New England.

Sharpless,     John      and   Shortridge,   Ray.      1975.    Biased
Underenumeration in Census Manuscripts," Journal of Urban
History, Vol.1, pp.409—437.
Starobin, Robert. 1970. Industrial Slavery in the Old South.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Steckel, Richard. 1987. "Census Matching and Migraion: A
Research Strategy." (mimeo) Ohio State University.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Population. 1800 through 1910.

______________        1840. Compendium of Enumeration. Washington,
D.C.: Thomas Allen

______________     1840. Enumeration of Inhabitants. Washington,
D.C.: Blair and Rives.
______________ • 1900. Occupations.
______________      1910. Vol. IV, Occupations.

______________      1940. Population, II.
______________   1975. Historical Statistics of the United
States. Washington D.C.
Weiss, Thomas. 1975. The Service Sector in the United States,
1839 to 1899. New York: Arno Press.

_____________ 1985.    "Adjustments to the Census Counts of
Population and Labor Force, 1870, 1890 and 1910"     (mimeo)
University of Kansas.

_____________    1986. "Revised Estimates of the United States
Workforce, 1800 to 1860" Studies in Income and Wealth, vol.51.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

______________  1986b. "Assessment and Revision of the
Antebellum Census Labor Force Statistics: 1850 and 1860"
(mimeo) University of Kansas.

_____________    1987.  "Demographic Aspects of the Urban
Population, 1800 to 1840" in Quantity and Quidity: Essays in
Honor of Stanley Lebergott. _Middietown, Conn.: Wesleyan
University Press.

______________  1987b. "Assessment and Revision of the
Antebellum Census Labor Force Statistics: 1840" (mimeo)
University of Kansas.

______________    1987c.   "Estimation   of the  Farm/Nonf arm
Distribution of Laborers, not otherwise specified; by State,
1850 to 1900" (mimeo) University of Kansas.

______________  1987d. "Assessment and Revision of the
Antebellum Census Labor Force Statistics: 1820" (mimeo)
University of Kansas.

Wheipton, P.K.    1926. "Occupational Groups in the United
States, 1820-1920,"    Journal of the American Statistical
Association.
Wright, Carroll. 1900. The History and Growth of the United
States Census. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
