                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MARKET-BASED DEBT-REDUCTION SCHEMES




                             Paul R. Krugman




                         Working Paper No. 2587




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                May 1988




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2587
                                                  May 1988



                      Market-based Debt-reduction Schemes




                                   ABSTRACT



             Recently much attention has been given to the idea of

        reducing the debt of developing countries through a "menu

        approach" of schemes that attempt to harness the discounts on debt

        in the secondary market. This paper, after reviewing the rationale

        for the orthodox strategy of concerted lending and the case for

        debt forgiveness, examines the logic behind several market-based

        debt reduction schemes. It shows that such schemes will ordinarily

        benefit both debtor and creditor only when the debtor is on the

        wrong side of the "debt relief Laffer curve" --     that   is, where a

        reduction in nominal claims actually increases expected payment.

        This is, however, also the case in which unilateral debt

        forgiveness is in the interest of creditors in any case. The

        implication is that there is no magic in market-based debt

        reduction, as opposed to more straightforward approaches.




Paul R. Krugman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139
                                     —1—




     In the early years of the third—world debt problem, there was

widespread consensus among creditors, international organizations, and
the debtor countries themselves about the kind of solution that was
needed. The basic post-1982 strategy was one of financing the debt
overhang -—   that   is, creditors were expected not only to reschedule

debt but to engage in concerted, "involuntary" lending. This lending
was intended to reduce the burden of outward resource transfer on
debtor nations to levels compatible with economic recovery, while
growth and inflation were expected to make a growing nominal debt
consistent with declining indebtedness as measured by the ratio of
debt to GNP or exports. The emergence of this strategy represented a
reniarkable turnabout from the market-oriented policies that the US had
been urging on the IMF only months before the debt crisis broke.
Suddenly the market mechanism for credit was discarded. Although the
effort was intended to protect the property rights of existing
creditors, new lending was expected to be provided as part of a
collective decision process, and in an environment where individual
lenders acting independently would not have been willing to extend
credit. Thus there was, as Carlos Diaz—Alejandro put it, an abrupt
socialization of the international capital market.
     More recently, the consensus in favor of financing the debt
overhang has begun to erode. One kind of challenge has come from
                                   —2—


advocates of debt forgiveness, who argue that instead of reducing
current resource transfer burdens by providing new money, creditors
should offer a once-for-all reduction in the future obligations of
countries. This view includes not only those who favor the interests
of the countries over those of their creditors, but also many who
argue that such forgiveness would actually be in the creditors'
interest, reducing debt to levels that are more realistic and thus
more likely to be serviced. While the debt forgivers offer a very
different prescription from the established strategy, however, they
agree in their advocacy of collective action as opposed to laissez—
faire.

     A different kind of challenge, however, has come from the
advocates of market—based solutions to the debt problem. A variety of
schemes —-   debt buy—backs, securitization, debt—equity swaps —— have
emerged in the last few years in an effort to find a way out of the
debt problem through voluntary actions on the part of creditors. The
advocates of these schemes claim that through a "menu approach" of new
financial arrangements, the exposure of banks and the liabilities of
countries can be reduced without the need for collectively bargained
new money or debt forgiveness. That is, market solutions are being
offered as an alternative to the concerted—action strategy that has
dominated the handling of the debt problem until now.
     Can the market solve the debt problem? Despite the popularity of
the new market—based schemes, there has been surprisingly little
                                   —3—


sensible discussion of their pros and cons. The purpose of this paper
is to provide a framework for thinking about market-based schemes for
dealing with debt, and to compare them with more orthodox strategies
of financing and forgiveness.
     The paper is in six parts. The first part reviews the rationale
for the original strategy of rescheduling and concerted lending. The
second considers the alternative case for debt forgiveness, with

emphasis on the conditions under which forgiveness is in the interests
of creditors as well as debtors (conditions that turn out to be
crucial for the evaluation of market—based schemes). I then consider
three kinds of market—based debt scheme: buybacks, securitization, and
debt-equity swaps. The final section of the paper offers some
tentative evaluations.


1. The rationale for concerted lending


     The defining feature of a problem debtor is its inability to
borrow on a voluntary basis ——   its   lack of normal access to
international capital markets. The essence of the concerted lending
strategy followed since 1982 has been to substitute non—market sources
of finance for the normal ones: to use a combination of official

lending and involuntary lending from existing creditors to supply
debtor nations with sufficient foreign exchange to service their
debts. To many observers this strategy has seemed absurd. After all,
                                     —4—


what sense does it make to lend still more to countries that already
owe more than they are expected to repay? It is important as a
starting point to understand the rationale for new lending to problem
debtors.

     This rationale is often stated in terms of the distinction
between liquidity and solvency: a country is asserted to be worth
lending to if it is solvent (i.e., is expected to be able to repay its
debt eventually) but not liquid (lacks the cash to service its debt on
a current basis). However, this distinction is a misleading one for
the debt crisis. If it were known that a country were solvent, it
would be able to borrow on a voluntary basis, and there would be no
liquidity problem. The liquidity problem arises precisely because
there is a possibility that the country will not be able fully to
repay its debt --   specifically,   because there is a sufficiently large
possibility of nonpayment that the expected present value of repayment
is less than the debt already outstanding (see Krugman (forthcoming)).
     Why, then, should creditors lend still more to such a country?
Because while incomplete payment is possible, it is not certain.
Suppose that a country might be able eventually to make payments equal
in present value to its outstanding debt, but that the risk of
nonpayment is sufficiently large that it cannot borrow on a voluntary
basis. Then in the absence of concerted action by its creditors, the
country will either have to meet its obligations out of current
resources or, if this is impossible, default immediately. The latter
                                     —5—



will guarantee that creditors do not get all that they are owed,
foreclosing the possibility of benefitting from any later good fortune
on the part of the country. It may therefore be in creditors' interest

to postpone at least part of a country's obligations, avoiding a
current default and preserving at least the possibility of a favorable
outcome later on.
     A country's obligations to amortize debt can be postponed by
rescheduling of principal, which is a standard procedure. However, for
heavily indebted countries this is not enough, since even the interest
payments on debt exceed what they can reasonably be expected to pay
out of current resources. Thus there is a need to postpone interest
obligations as well. Such a postponement could be achieved directly,
through interest capitalization, but this has so far been opposed
strongly by creditors because it makes the process excessively

automatic (and perhaps also excessively transparent). Instead the
method has been to round up existing creditors and require them to
provide new loans that cover a fraction of interest payments,
effectively deferring interest obligations. This is the process of
"involuntary" or "concerted" lending.

     The potential gains from concerted lending were argued strongly
in the well—known study by dine (1983) and have been demonstrated in

formal models (see Sachs (1984), Krugman (1985)). The point may be
seen informally if we think in terms of the subjective discount on
debt —-   the   percentage by which existing creditors expect the present
                                     —6—


value of actual repayments on debt to fall short of a country's legal
obligations. Suppose that creditors believe that if no concerted
lending is undertaken, a country will be forced into a disorderly
default in which creditors will receive only a fraction (l-d) of the
nominal value of their claims. Suppose also that they believe that a

sufficiently large program of concerted lending -— say lending L
dollars --   will   reduce the expected loss from d to d*. Then it is
straightforward to see how such a program can produce a net gain. Each
additional dollar lent as part of the concerted lending program is
lent at an expected loss of d*; however, the program increases the
value of existing debt by (d-d*)D, where D is the initial stock of
debt outstanding. Thus the benefits of the program to creditors
exceed its cost as long as d*L < (d—d*)D, or as long as L/D < (d—

d*)/d*.
       To take an example, suppose that absent a program of concerted
lending the subjective discount would be .5 ——     creditors   would expect
to get only half of what they are owed ——    but   that with a program that
avoids immediate default the discount falls to .25. Then it is in the
interest of creditors to pursue such a program as long as L/D < 1 ——
that   is, as long as the increase in their exposure is less than 100
percent!
       It is important to notice that this example clearly shows the
fallacy of some common arguments against the process of lending to
problem debtors. It is not true, for example, that the existence of a
                                     —7—


secondary market discount on debt (presumably more or less equal to
the subjective probability of nonpayment d) means that new money
should not be put in. It only means that such new money will not be
provided voluntarily --   but   that is by definition true of a problem
debtor. It is also therefore not true that unwillingness of lenders

other than the existing creditors to provide funds, or for that matter

export of capital by domestic residents, are arguments against
provision of new money by the creditors.
     While thinking of the problem in this way makes the potential
benefits of concerted lending clear, however, it also makes clear one
of its problems. The gains from concerted lending are collective. They
arise because by lending enough to avoid immediate default creditors
raise the value of the claims they already have. However, looked at in
isolation, each new loan is made at a loss. Thus nobody who is not
already a creditor of the problem country will be willing to lend, and
even existing creditors will lack an individual incentive to lend. We
therefore have the now-familiar free-rider problem, in which lending
may be in everyone's collective interest but fails to take place
because no individual finds it in his or her interest. The process of
concerted lending, with creditors negotiating collectively, with
pressure from creditor central banks and international agencies, and
with the not-too-implicit threat by countries to declare moratorium if
new money is not provided, is designed to overcome this free rider
problem. In practice, the problem remains serious ——    not   just because
                                   —8—


it has been difficult to get agreements to provide new money, but
because of capital flight that in effect free-rides on the provision
of new money by banks and official agancies.
     Even aside from the free—rider problem, however, there are
important objections to the strategy of concerted lending. The crude

complaint against such a strategy is that it simply puts heavily
indebted countries deeper into debt. Clearly this is not right. As
many have emphasized, in a world where countries can grow and where
there is still some inflation it is possible for nominal debt to grow
yet for a country to become more creditworthy over time (see, for

example, Feldstein (1986)). In fact, however, problem debtor nations
have grown much more slowly since the onset of the debt crisis than
before, and partly as a result their debt indicators have improved
little if at all. To at least some extent the slow growth can be
attributed to the debt burden itself. This at least raises the
possibility that the insistence of creditors on maintaining the full
extent of their claims on debtor nations may be self—defeating,
reducing their expected repayment below what might be achieved through
a settlement that reduces countries' debt burden.
     The possibility that less may be more --   that   a reduction in the
debt burden of highly indebted countries, rather than financing that
simply postpones debt repayment, might be to everyone's advantage --
underlies   the case for a replacement of the strategy of financing debt
with forgiving it.
                                     —9—




2. The analytics of debt forgiveness



     Why   should   creditors ever forgive debt rather than postpone
repayment? If the stream of payments from the debtor were unaffected
by the burden of the debt, it would always be preferable to maintain
the nominal value of creditors' claims. After all, even the most

seemingly hopeless debtor might conceivably discover a valuable
mineral resource or experience an unexpected surge of economic growth,
and it makes sense for the creditors to preserve the option of

benefitting from such good fortune if it arises. If they reduce the
obligations of a country, they have sacrificed this option.
     However, the potential repayment of a country is not independent
of its debt burden. When a country's obligations exceed the amount it

is likely to be able to pay, these obligations act like a high
marginal tax rate on the country: if it succeeds in doing better than
expected, the main benefits will accrue, not to the country, but to
its creditors. This fact discourages the country from doing well at
two levels. First, the government of a country will be less likely to
be willing to take painful or politically unpalatable measures to
improve economic performance if the benefits are likely to go to
foreign creditors in any case. Second, the burden of the national debt
will fall on domestic residents through taxation, and importantly
                                 —10—


through taxation of capital; so the overhang of debt acts as a
deterrent to investment.
     Over and above these costs to potential repayment is the fact
that no clean Chapter XI proceeding exists for sovereign debtors, and
a corifrontational and disorderly default may reduce the actual
recepits to a creditor below what could have been obtained if debt had
earlier been reduced to a level that could have been paid.
     The upshot of these negative effects is that the higher is the
external debt of a country, the larger the probability of nonpayment;
and thus the greater the subjective discount on that debt. If debt is
high enough, further increases in the level of debt may actually lead
to a smaller expected value of payments1.
     A useful way to think about the relationship between debt and
expected repayment is in terms of the curve CD illustrated in Figure
1. On the horizontal axis is the nominal value of a country's debt; on
the vertical axis the actual expected payments. At low levels of debt
nominal claims may be expected to be fully repaid, so that the outcome
lies along the 45 degree line. At higher levels of debt, however, the

possibility of nonpayment grows, so that the expected payment traces
out a curve that falls increasingly below the 45 degree line. At a
point such as L the ratio of expected payment to nominal debt may be
measured by the slope of a ray from the origin; ignoring risk and

transaction costs, we may regard this as approximating the secondary
market price of debt.
                                     —11—


     Although increased levels of debt above point C will be
associated with lower secondary market prices, at first the total
value of debt will still rise. At high enough debt levels, however,
the disincentive effects discussed above may be large enough so that
the curve actually turns down.

     We may now ask: under what conditions will a reduction in nominal
claims ——   i.e.,   debt forgiveness ——   actually   leave the creditors
better off? Many authors have suggested that when debt sells at a
discount on the secondary market creditors should "recognize reality"
and reduce their claims on the country correspondingly. However, it is
clear from Figure 1 that this is not necessarily right. At point L
there is a secondary discount, but a reduction in the claims of
creditors would still reduce what they expect to receive overall. The
reason is implicit in the discussion of the previous section. Given
the uncertainty about the future, a reduction in claims deprives
creditors of the option value of sharing in good fortune. Only if this
option value is outweighed by the improved incentives offered by a
debt reduction do the creditors gain by passing on part of the
secondary discount to the debtor. This is going to happen only if the
debt burden is very large, so that these incentive effects
predominate, at a point like R.
     The curve DRLC should by now be a familiar sort of object. It is
the Debt Relief Laffer Curve. That is, just as governments may
sometimes actually increase tax revenue by reducing tax rates,
                                 —12—



creditors may sometimes increase expected payment by forgiving part of
a country's debt. In both cases the proposition that less is more
depends on an initial extreme situation, whether of taxes that provide
extreme disincentives or of a debt burden that is crippling in its
effect on economic growth. Arguments that debt relief is in everyone's
interest are, in effect, arguments that countries are on the wrong
side of the debt relief Laffer curve.
     Now of course in practice it is very difficult to ascertain which
side of the curve a highly indebted country is on. There is a
consensus that hugely indebted countries with weak governments like
Bolivia are on the wrong side, and this has led to granting of debt
relief with few arguments. But for the major debtors the question is

anybody's guess.
     In spite of the difficulty of applying the concept of the DRLC in
practice, it remains useful as a way of organizing our thinking. For
one thing, it is worth knowing what we don't know --    the   Figure makes
it clear that both the confidence that secondary discounts can be
freely passed on to debtors and the hard—line view that debt should
never be forgiven are wrong in principle. Equally important, the DRLC
is useful as a way to think about the market—based schemes for debt
reduction that have recently gained so much prominence. For it turns
out that the prospects for success of these schemes are intimately
tied to where on the debt relief Laffer curve we are.
                                 —13—


     The reason should be apparent. Market-based debt reduction
schemes, while they are sometimes aimed at producing other benefits,
are in large part intended to "harness" the discount in the secondary
arket to the mutual benefit of debtor and creditors. As we have just
seen, however, when conce'ted debt relief is considered, a secondary
discount offers the possibility of mutual gain only when the debt is
large enough to put the country on the wrong side of the curve. Can a
market—based scheme harness the discount where collective action
cannot? As we will see, it can't ——   mutually   beneficial debt reduction
through market—based schemes is possible only under the same
circumstances as mutually beneficial debt relief.


3. Debt buvbacks


     Some of the problem debtors have accumulated substantial foreign
exchange reserves, and others could possibly choose to run large
enough trade surpluses to do the same. At the same time, the debts of
these countries continue to trade at substantial discounts, reflecting
doubts about the willingness or ability of the countries to continue
to achieve such favorable trade performance. This raises an obvious

possibility for reducing countries' debt through voluntary action
rather than concerted debt forgiveness. Simply let them buy back their
own debt on the secondary market, and the effect will be to reduce
                                 —14—



debt even net of foreign exchange reserves, because of the discount at
which the debt sells. Is there anything wrong with this?2

     Now legally debtors are normally prohibited from repurchasing
their own debt at a discount. The reasons are twofold. First, there is
the issue of seniority. Use of reserves to repurchase debt may impair
the debtor's ability to repay the remaining debt, and existing
creditors are entitled to first claim on whatever repayment the debtor
is in fact able to make. In addition, there is a moral hazard problem:
allowing debtors to buy back their debt at a discount rewards the
least reliable, who therefore have the lowest secondary prices.
     If it is decided that buybacks are in the interest of both
debtors and creditors, the moral hazard argument may be something that
can be dealt with. For one thing, conditionality could be applied to
the granting of permission for buybacks. There are no doubt practical
problems with this, but these may be left aside to focus instead on
the question of whether it is in the interest of creditors to allow

buybacks.
     To get some insight into this, it is useful to consider a simple
numerical example, illustrated in Table 1. Here we imagine a
hypothetical country that owes its creditors $100 billion, and which
has uncertain prospects of repayment. Ignoring the question of when
the country can make payments, we simply assume that there are two
possibilities: a "bad" state in which the country can generate only
$20 billion of foreign exchange, and a "good" state in which it can
                                   —15—



generate something more than $100 billion, say $110 billion. We also
assume that the country starts with foreign exchange reserves of $5
billion. The probability of the bad state is 2/3, that of the good
state 1/3.
     Consider first what happens if there is no buyback. Then in the
bad state the creditors collect 25 —-     the   foreign exchange the country
is able to earn, plus the reserves it has available. In the good state
the country pays the 100 it owes. Thus the expected payments to
creditors are 25*(2/3) +   lOO*(l/3)   = 50. Ignoring risk, the secondary

market price on the country's debt will be .5.

     Now suppose that the country uses its foreign exchange reserves
to buy back part of its debt. Let us also initially suppose that
buybpck has no imDact on the Drobability of a good outcome -- which as
we will see is crucial. At a secondary market price of .5, the foreign
exchange reserves can be used to buy back $10 billion of debt,
reducing the outstanding debt to $90 billion3. Those creditors who
sold out will receive $5 billion, whatever happens. Those who did not
will receive $20 billion in the bad state (because the foreign
exchange reserves are now gone) and $90 billion in the good state. Has
the change hurt or helped the creditors?
     The answer is that it has hurt them. The expected payments to the
creditors are 5 in either state (the value of debt sold off in the
secondary market) plus 20 in the bad state, plus 90 in the good state,
implying expected payments of
                                             —16—




5 +     20*(2/3)   +   90*(l/3)   = 48 1/3



That is, the buyback reduces the expected total payment to the
creditors. The effect of a buyback in this case should be to lower the
price of debt on the secondary market, and make the creditors worse
of f.

        The reason for this result is that the buyback reduces the net

contribution of the country in the good state, when it could repay its
whole debt but now gets to pay less, while it has no effect in the bad
state, when the country in any case pays all that it can. So the
country gains at creditors' expense. It should be clear that this is a
fairly general result. If a country's ability to pay is not affected
by a buyback, then the buyback reduces the net payments by a country
when it can pay and produces no gains for creditors when it cannot.
        The only way that this result could be reversed is if the buyback

improves the country's ability to pay by a sufficient amount to offset
this negative effect. The incentive effects indeed work in that
direction. Consider the benefits to the couxtry of having the good
state occur. In the bad state the creditors take whatever the country
can give. In the good state the country gets to keep any excess above
its nominal debt. We have assumed that the country's foreign exchange

earnings are 110 and its reserves 5, while its debt is only 100; so in
the absence of a buyback it gets to keep 15 in the good state. After a
                                 —17—


buyback its reserves are gone, but its debt is reduced to 90, so in
the good state it gets to keep 20. This greater gain in the good state
should provide a greater incentive for the country to pursue
adjustment policies, to invest, etc.. --   all   those things that we
think the country can do to increase its future ability to pay.
     The creditors may, then, benefit from a buyback, but only if the
increased probability of the good state is enough to outweigh the loss
of their rights to share in the good fortune if it comes. But this is
exactly the condition that we saw was necessary for creditors to
benefit from debt forgiveness. So in fact it is only in the interest
of creditors to allow buybacks of debt on the secondary market when
the debtor country is on the wrong side of the debt relief Laffer
curve.

     We can see the equivalence precisely in the context of our
numerical example. Suppose that instead of allowing the country to buy
back part of its debt, the creditors had instead simply reduced the
face value of outstanding claims from 100 to 95. Then the aggregate
payments to creditors would be the same as in the buyback case: 25 in
the bad state, 95 in the good. Also, in the good state the country
would have the same amount of foreign exchange left over: earnings of
110, less debt of 95, plus reserves of 5 =   20. Thus the incentive to
increase the probability of the good state would be the same. It

follows, then, that allowing buyback on the secondary market will
benefit creditors if and only if debt forgiveness would do the same.
                                   —18—



     This suggests that creditors will not readily agree to buybacks
unless they are convinced that debt forgiveness is definitely
desirable --   which therefore also implies that debt buybacks are not
going to be in any meaningful sense an alternative to the collective-
action strategies that were discussed in the first two sections of
this paper.


4. Securjtizatj.pn



     Debt buybacks are limited in their possible extent by the
quantity of foreign exchange reserves available. Recently, however,
investment bankers have proposed a way in which this limitation might
be overcome. The idea of securitizatjon is that a country issues new
debt in the form of bonds that either are sold for cash that can then
be used to repurchase debt on the secondary market, or are directly
exchanged for debt (as in the recent Morgan—Mexico deal). If the new
bonds sell at a smaller discount than existing debt, the effect will
be to reduce the debt outstanding without any expenditure of foreign

exchange reserves by the debtor.
    What should be immediately clear --      although it has been obscure
in most practical discussions ——   is   that such schemes will work only
if the new debt is somehow made senior to the existing debt. If the
new debt is not senior, it will face the same probability of non-
payment as the existing debt, and should therefore sell at the same
                                 —19—


discount. This will mean that there will be no prospect for a
reduction in net debt. Suppose, for example, that a country's existing
debt sells at a 50 percent discount, and that the country attempts to
reduce its debt through a securitization scheme involving the issue of
$10 billion in face value of new bonds. If these are not senior to the

existing debt, we can suppose that they will sell for only $5 billion;
this will allow retirement of $10 billion of old debt, but the country
will still end up exactly where it started. (This also confirms that
the discount should not have changed). So securitization depends on
making the new debt senior to the old, with some perceived first claim
on payments.

     Such seniority is difficult to achieve. A sovereign debtor cannot
make a truly credible commitment to service some of its debt more
reliably than others, since any default puts it outside international
law anyway. Nonetheless, it may be possible in some cases to establish
de facto seniority. In the Morgan—Mexico plan the de facto seniority
was supposed to come from the fact that the new debt took the form of
bonds rather than bank loans. Since 1982 Mexican bonds have not been

subject to reschedulings and new—money requests, essentially because
of their relatively minor importance and the difficulty of achieving
collective action from bondholders. So the Mexican government claimed
that the new bonds should be regarded as effectively senior to the

existing bank debt. In practice they were only marginally successful
                                  —20—


 in this: a few bonds were sold at a discount somewhat smaller than
that on bank debt, but most of the offering went untaken.

      Suppose, however, that it were indeed possible to establish the
principle that new securities issued to retire part of existing debt
are senior to the old debt remaining. Would such a securitization plan
be in the mutual interest of debtors and creditors? We can show that

the problem is exactly analogous to that of debt buybacks, and that
the answer once again depends on which side of the debt relief Laffer
curve the debtor is on.

      Table 2 shows an example that is designed to stress the parallel
with the example we used to examine debt buybacks. We consider a
country that has an initial debt of $100 billion, and that in the "bad
state" can pay 25, in the "good state" generates resources of 115. The
probabilities of the two states are again 2/3 and 1/3 respectively, so
that in the absence of a securjtjzatjon plan the expected repayment is
50.

      Now suppose that the country issues $5 billion of new bonds that
are somehow guaranteed to be senior to the existing debt. These bonds
will be fully repaid even in the bad state, so they will sell at full
face value, and can therefore be used to buy back $10 billion of old
debt4. The country's net debt will therefore be reduced to 95.
      The parallel with the case of a buyback should now be apparent.
In the bad state the new creditors receive 5, the old creditors 20,
for a total payment of 25. In the good state the new creditors also
                                      —21—


receive 5, the old creditors 90, for a total payment of 95. So if the
probability of a good state has not been increased by the package, the
total expected payments to creditors have been reduced to


(2/3)*25 +     (1/3)*95   = 48   /3

       In order to make creditors better off, the probability of the

good state must rise enough to compensate for creditors' loss of the
option of benefitting as much from that state. The incentive for the
country to increase the probability of the good state rises, just as
in the buyback case: before the debt reduction, the country    gets to
keep   115 — 100 = 15 in that state, after the debt reduction it gets to

keep 115 - 95 =     20. Thus just as in the buyback case, a debt reduction
can benefit the creditors, but only if the debtor is on the wrong side
of the debt relief Laffer curve.

       It is also apparent that a straightforward debt forgiveness,

reducing debt from 100 to 95, will have precisely the same effects as
the securitization scheme.


5. Debt-eauity swaps


       The most publicized market-based scheme for debt reduction is the
use of deals in which creditors sell debt at some discount in    return
for   local   currency that must be invested in equity. In some of the
                                 —22—


more enthusiastic descriptions of such swaps, the impression has been
given that they solve all problems at once: that they could
simultaneously provide a source of capital inflow and cancel
countries' external obligations (see, for example, World Financial

Markets, September 1986).
     In fact, a debt-equity swap neither provides a capital inflow nor
cancels a country's obligations. The foreign investor does not bring
foreign exchange to the country, since it is the country's own debt
that is presented to the central bank; thus there is no capital
inflow. The country's obligations are not cancelled; the foreigners
acquire an equity claim on the country to replace their previous
claim. What has really happened is essentially the same as what
happens in securitization. The country has exchanged a new kind of
liability for some of its existing liabilities.
     Now a first question about this exchange is whether it can lead
to a net reduction in the country's external obligations by harnessing
the discount in the secondary market. The answer should be immediately
clear when we realize that a debt—equity swap is a kind of
securitization: the country can capture the secondary market discount
to the extent that the new claims are regarded as senior to the old.
In the current political and economic climate it is widely expected
that direct foreign investors will be allowed to repatriate earnings
and/or use their profits as they wish within the debtor nations, even
if these countries are failing to repay debts fully. This has allowed
                                 —23—



debt-equity swaps to capture part of the discount, though by no means
all. However, once one realizes that the ability to reduce net

obligations through debt-equity swaps depends on seniority of equity
(which is itself a fairly weird idea), the limitations become

apparent.
     While debt-equity swaps are at a fundamental level a kind of
securitization, the fact that the assets involved are so different
introduces three other considerations that do not arise in

securitization schemes involving issue of bonds. These are the effects
of the swaps on the timing of payment; the possibility of "round-
tripping" or other diversions of capital inflows; and the fiscal
impacts.

     In principle, exchanging a debt for equity should have a
favorable effect on a country's timing of obligations. Where even a
rescheduled debt requires a country to make a stream of payments that
is flat in nominal terms, an equity claim on a country will normally
provide a stream of repatriated earnings that rises over time with
both growth and world inflation, and that is therefore lower at the
beginning, higher later. Thus converting debt to equity can serve the
same purpose that concerted lending is supposed to serve, of
postponing payment to a time when the country is presumed likely to be
more able to make it. An ideal debt-equity swap would clearly loosen
the short-run liquidity constraint on a problem debtor.
                                 —24—


     In practice debt-equity swaps will not always be ideal, and it is
unfortunately easy for them actually to worsen the immediate foreign
exchange position of countries that allow them. The most extreme case
is that of "round-tripping": after swapping debt for equity, an
invvestor then sells the equity and withdraws the proceeds from the
country. In this case the debt-equity swap ends up being in effect a
use of foreign exchange reserves to buy back debt on the secondary
market, probably at less than the full discount. (Of course if
investors know that they can get away with round-tripping, they will
be prepared to pay the full discount for the right to carry out the
transaction).
     Even if literal round—tripping does not occur, debt-equity swaps
can still consume foreign exchange on net. Suppose that a foreign firm
uses a debt—equity swap to carry out an investment that it would have
undertaken anyway. Had it carried out the investment without a swap,

it would have brought foreign exchange to the central bank to exchange
for local currency with which to make the investment. When it does the
swap instead, this foreign exchange inflow fails to occur. So in
effect the central bank has used some of its own foreign exchange
reserves to make a purchase of debt on the secondary market.
     It is important to notice that the net impact on foreign exchange
reserves from a debt-equity swap is not, as many people continue to
think, a tradeoff between the capital inflow aspect and the diversion
through round-tripping and substitution for alternative financing. At
                                 —25—


best, in the case of an ideal swap that represents 100 percent
"additionality", there is a zero capital inf low; any round-tripping or
substitution turns this into a net capital outflow. Since in practice
there is bound to be some leakage, realistically debt—equity swaps are
a mixture of securitization and buyback.

     However, the securitization involved in debt—equity swaps is very
different in its fiscal effects from straight securitization. In
straight securitization the debtor government offers a new asset in
exchange for old debt; in a debt-equity swap it offers assets
belonging to the private sector. To make this offer, the government
must provide the local currency with which to buy these assets; this
currency issue will be inflationary unless offset by domestic
borrowing. In the latter case the counterpart of the foreign
investor's swap of debt for equity is a debtor swap of foreign for
domestic debt.

     So far so good; but many debtor governments have a domestic debt
problem as well as a foreign debt problem. They have large budget
deficits, so that anything that aggravates the budget deficit has a
real cost; and, crucially, they pay much higher real interest rates on
their internal debt than they do on their external debt -- say 20
percent versus 5. So even if a debt-equity swap does not have a large
negative effect on foreign exchange reserves, it is virtually certain
to aggravate a debtor country's fiscal problems.
                                 —26—


    As this discussion shows, debt—equity swaps are quite complex in
their effects, and difficult to evaluate even after the fact. They are
in principle a kind of securitization that has the additional
advantage of tilting the stream of payments away from the present and
toward the future, but they are in practice likely to involve buyback
of debt at a higher effective price than the secondary price, and will

typically aggravate debtor fiscal problems.
     Will creditors benefit from debt—equity swaps? To the extent that
these swaps are a combination of buyback and securitization, the
answer depends as usual on the debtor's position on the debt relief

Laffer curve. The financing aspect may improve the debtor's prospects
as well, while the fiscal consequences will tend to reduce
creditworthiness. There is also an important though not too laudable
possibility for gain: that the countries may mishandle the swaps in
such a way as to allow those who get the chance to make swaps to make
substantial rents.


6. Summary and conclusions


     The main conclusion of this paper may be stated bluntly: there is
no magic in market—based schemes for debt reduction. The secondary
market discount on developing country debt does not automatically
constitute a resource that can be harnessed to provide free debt
relief; in many circumstances repurchase of debt on the secondary
                                 —27—



market, whether through reserve—financed buybacks or through creation
of new, senior securities, will hurt existing creditors. There is a
mutual benefit from such repurchases only when a reduced debt burden
strongly increases a country's likely ability to repay --     the   same
situation in which unilateral debt forgiveness is in the interests of
creditors in any case.

     The most heavily advertised scheme for market-based debt
reductions is the use of debt-equity swaps. This paper has argued that
such swaps are in principle a kind of securitization; that "round-
tripping" and other leakages tend to make them degenerate into
buybacks financed by reserves; and that they are likely both to be
disappointing in terms of their ability to capture the secondary
market discount and costly in their effects on countries' fiscal
positions. While there are potential advantages as well, the claims
made for debt-equity swaps by their sponsors are clearly exaggerated.
     Clearly, then, market-based debt reduction cannot serve as an
alternative to the orthodox strategy of rescheduling and concerted
lending. Schemes that benefit the debtor at the expense of the
creditor —— such as buybacks and securitization for countries not on

the wrong side of the debt relief Laffer curve --   will   be opposed by
existing creditors when they become more than marginal. Schemes that
benefit the creditors at the expense of the debtor -- such as debt-

equity swaps that fail to capture the secondary discount, while
allowing firms to make investments they would have made in any case -—
                                 —28—



will be opposed by the debtors as their effects become clear. Mutual
agreement on schemes will come only when, as in the recent Bolivian
case, there is more or less universal agreement that the debtor is so
heavily indebted that a reduction in claims actually increases

expected repayment.
                   TABLE 1: EFFECTS OF A BUYBACK



                                    Bad state      Good state




    Foreign exchange generated*         20            110




A. j2 buyback

     Payments to creditors              25            100

     Residual benefit to country         0             15




B. Reserves used      buyback

     Payments to creditors who           5              5

     sell out



     Payments to other creditors        20             90




     Total payments                      25            95




     Residual benefit to country          0            20




*Country is assumed initially to have 5 in reserves
                TABLE 2: EFFECTS OF SECtJRITIZATION



                                    Bad state         Good state




     Foreign exchange generated         25               115




A. No securitization

     Payments to creditors              25               100

    Residual benefit to country          0                15




B. Senior bonds exchanged     part of debt

     Payments to new creditors           5                 5

     Payments to other creditors        20                90

     Total payments                     25                95




     Residual benefit to country         0                20
Value




               R


                   D

0                  Debt

    Figure 1
                                    R— 1




REFERENCES


Cline, W. 1983. International Debt and the Stability of the World
Economy, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.


Feldstein, M. 1986. "International debt service and economic growth:

some simple analytics", NBER Working Paper #2138.


Krugman, P. 1985. "International debt strategies in an uncertain
world", in: G. Smith and 3. Cuddington, eds., International DEabt and
the Developing Countries, Washington: World Bank.


Krugman, P. (forthcoming): "Financing vs. forgiving a debt overhang",
Journal of Development Economics.


Portes, R. 1987. "Debt and the market", presented at the Group of
Thirty plenary meeting, September.


Sachs, J. 1984. Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing,
International Finance Section, Princeton University, #54.
                                  N-i




NOTES


1. If there is no uncertainty about the future, then it is always in
the interests of creditors to forgive debt down to the level at which
it will be repaid (see Sachs (forthcoming)). In this case any
secondary discount would constitute a case for debt forgiveness.
Unfortunately, this is not the case when the future is uncertain.


2. Debt buybacks at a discount were actually quite common in the
1930s. See Portes (1987).


3. Actually this is not quite right, because the secondary market
price of the debt will change as a result of the buyback, and the

amount purchased will depend on the post-buyback equilibrium price,
not the pre—buyback one. For a marginal change, however, this makes no
difference, and by focussing on the total returns to creditors we

bypass the problem in any case.


4. The same qualification as in the previous footnote applies:
actually the price at which the bonds trade for old debt will be the
post-securitization discount, which changes as a result of the action

itslef. But the analysis is exactly right for marginal changes, and
                                 N-2


the key point of total returns to creditors is correct.
APPENDIX:    A FORMAL MODEL OF            FORGIVENESS,   BUYBACKS,   &jrn

SECURITIZATION


       A key point in the text was that the condition under which it

is in creditors' interest to allow buybacks, whether financed out

of foreign exchange reserves or by the issue of new, senior

securities, is the same as that under which it is in their

collective interest to reduce a country's debt obligations - -

namely, when the country is on the wrong side of the "debt relief
Laffer curve", so that a reduction in the country's nominal

obligations actually increases its expected repayment. In the text

this point was suggested verbally and with numerical examples;

here I make the point with a simple formal model. The model is

closely based on an earlier model of mine (Krugman 1988), but is

even    further   simplified   in       order   to allow market-based

debt-reduction schemes to be introduced with a minimum of

complication.

       Consider, then, a country that may not be able to repay all

of its external debt. We assume for simplicity that there are only

two possible states of the world: a "bad state" in which the

country definitely cannot repay all its debt, and a "good state"

in which the country definitely can. The maximum trade surplus

that the country can run in each state is FB, Fc. The actual




                                    1
payment made in each state is TB, TG.

     Creditors are assumed to able to make the country pay all

that it can, up to the level of its debt obligations. In the bad

state, this implies




                            TB_FB+R                           (1)




where R is the country's foreign exchange reserves. In the good

state, the country simply pays what it owes:




                            TcD                               (2)




where D is the country's debt.

     Let S be what the country has "left over" after paying its

creditors -   - that   is, the sum of feasible trade surplus and

foreign exchange reserves, less actual payment. We have



                           S—F+R-T                            (3)



in each state.

     Now a key element of any case for debt forgiveness must be an

incentive effect from debt on a country's ability to repay. We

introduce this by assumin.g that the probability of the "good

state" depends on how hard the country tries, as measured by a

variable we can call adjustment effort, A:



                                 — h(A)                       (6)




                                  2
       The country is assumed to dislike making an adjustment

effort, but to like receiving a surplus 5; in particular, the

country's objective function may be written1



                            U—S - V(A)                         (5)




       Since the country must make an adjustment effort before it

knows whether the state will be good or bad, and since there is

something left over for the country only if the state is good, we

have an expected value of the country's objective function



                    EU   h(A)[Fc + R   -
                                           D)   -
                                                     V(A)      (6)




where the term in brackets is what is left over to the country in

the good state. Since the country will maximize this with respect

to A, and since the country's choice of A determines the

probability of a good state, we may write the outcome of the

country's maximization as



                            —      +R       -
                                                D)



with      > 0.

       Next consider the expected receipts of the country's


 LThe reason for assuming that the country's objective function is

linear in S is in order to purge the problem of any risk sharing

aspects - -   not   that these may not matter, but they do not seem

 central to the issue at hand.

                                   3
creditors. We can write the expected value of repayments as



                      ET —    + (1   -
                                               + FB]                          (8)




       And we can now ask: does a reduction of nominal debt raise or

lower the expected repayment? Clearly,



                                                                              (9)
                      8ET/8D_pGp[DRFB]

       A reduction in debt will therefore increase expected

repayment --   that   is, we are on the wrong side of the debt relief

Laffer curve --        whenever          -         -   R   -         <   0.   The
                                             p[D               FB]
interpretation of this condition is that the positive incentive

effects of the debt relief must outweigh the cost to creditors of

the fact that they get paid less in the good state.




Buybacks



       Now we consider what happens if a country is allowed to use

part of its foreign exchange reserves to buy back debt on the

secondary market. We assume that the secondary market price of

a dollar of debt is simply the expected payments on that debt, so

that



                              a — ET/D                                        (10)




where a is the seondary market price.

       Suppose that a small quantity of reserves -dR is used to

                                         4
repurchase debt on the secondary market. These reserves will buy

back a larger nominal value of debt, so that



                              dD —
                                                                (11)



     The fact that debt falls by more than reserves means that the

country will have more "left over" in the good state, so that it

will have an incentive to do more adjustment, raising the

probability of that state occurring:



                             —
              dpc p[dD - dR]               p[l   -
                                                     a1]dR      (12)




    The change in the secondary market price reflects both any

change in the expected payments and the fact of a smaller

remaining debt:



             do —    D1[dET    -
                                   adD] — D1[dET      -
                                                          dR]   (13)




    But the change in expected repayment is


             dET —                 +       + [DRFB]dpc
                         (lPc)dR                                (14)

                    — dR +
                             Pc1)dR p[DRF](a*1)dR
                                            -




    Substituting back into (13), we find



                  do —                                          (15)




                                       5
    A buyback that uses part of reserves (dR < 0) willtherfre

produce a rise in the secondary price, benefitting creditors, if

and only if         +         -   R   -             < 0.   This is precisely the
                        p[D                   FBI
condition for a reduction in debt to raise expected payment. So

allowing a buyback will benefit creditors only if the country is

on the wrong side of the debt relief Laffer curve.



Securitization



     Next suppose that the debtor country is able to issue

new debt in exchange for old, and that this new debt is somehow

made effectively senior to the old, so that it receives first

claim on available resources in the bad state. We will suppose

that a small quantity of new debt dN is issued. Since the new debt

is senior, it will trade at par, and can be used to retire old

debt at the secondary market price:



                              dD —            -l                            (16)




In the bad state, the new debt gets served first, and old debt

receives only what is left:




                          TB_FB+RN                                          (17)




     As before, the incentive for a country adjustment effort

depends on what is left over after paying both new and old debt;

thus we can write


                                          6
                     PGPG(FG+RDN)                                (18)




       Now consider the effect of issuing some new debt on the

expected payments to the remaining creditors:



         dET —
                 (lpc)dN    -
                                    pcc7 + p[DFB.R](a1)dN        (19)

             — -dN +
                       (p       -




       Substituting back into (13), this gives us the change in the

secondary market price



              do —
                     D'(a*1)(p p[DFzR])(dN)
                                        -
                                                                 (20)




       As in the case of a buyback using reserves, the value of the

                                                                    -
remaining debt increases if and only if p -         p[D-R-F3] < 0 -
that   is, if the country is on the wrong side of the debt Laffer

curve.




                                            7
