                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DOES MONETARY POLICY MATTER? A NEW TEST IN
                     THE SPIRIT OF FRIEDMAN AND SCHWARTZ




                               Christina Romer

                                 David Rorner




                           Working Paper No. 2966




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 0218
                                  May 1989




This paper is part of NBERs research programs in Economic Fluctuations and
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. We have benefited greatly from the
excellent comments and suggestions that we have received from numerous
colleagues. We wish to thank particularly George Akerlof, Laurence Ball, Ben
Bernanke, Olivier Blanchard, Charles Calomiris, Barry Eichengreen, Stanley
Fischer, Benjamin Friedman, Milton Friedman, N. Gregory Mankiw, Thomas Mayer,
Jeffrey Miron, Anna Schwartz, Richard Sutch, Peter Temin, and Janet Yellen.
We are also grateful to the National Science foundation for financial support
and to David Parsley for able research assistance. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2966
                                         May 1989


                 DOES MONETARy POLICY MATTER? A NEW TEST IN THE
                         SPIRIT OF FRIEDMA1 AND SCHWARTZ


                                   ABSTRACT




     This paper uses the historical record to isolate episodes in which
there were large monetary disturbances not caused by output fluctuations.
It then tests whether these monetary changes have important real effects.
The central part of the paper is a study of postwar U.S. monetary history.
We identify six episodes in which the Federal Reserve in effect decided to
attempt to create a recession to reduce inflation. We find that a shift to
anti-inflationary policy led, on average, to a rise in the unemployment rate
of two percentage points, and that this effect is highly statistically
significant and robust to a variety of changes in specification.
     We reach three other major conclusions. First, the real effects of
these monetary disturbances are highly persistent. Second, the six shocks
that we identify account for a considerable fraction of postwar economic
fluctuations. And third, evidence from the interwar era also suggests that
monetary disturbances have large real effects.




                                        Christina D. Romer
                                        David H. Romer
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of California
                                        Berkeley, CA 94720
1. INTRODUCTION


      This paper investigates whether nominal disturbances have important
real effects. What differentiates the paper from the countless others on
the same subject is that it focuses not on purely statistical evidence but
on evidence derived from the historical record —— evidence based on what we
call the "narrative approach." This approach was pioneered by Friedman and
Schwartz in their Monetary History of the United States and has provided the
evidence that we suspect has been most important in shaping economists'
beliefs about the real effects of monetary shocks. Despite its
significance, however, the narrative approach has been largely neglected in
formal research in the twenty—five years since Friedman and Schwartz's work.
In this paper we both assess the evidence presented in the Monetary History
and, more importantly, conduct a test of the link between monetary
disturbances and real output for the postwar United States in the spirit of
Friedman and Schwartz's approach.
      The reason that purely statistical tests, such as regressions of
output on money, studies of the effects of "anticipated" and "unanticipated"
money, and vector autoregressions, probably have not played a crucial role
in forming most economists' views about the real effects of monetary
disturbances is that such procedures cannot persuasively identify the
direction of causation. On the one hand, if firms that are planning to
expand their output first increase their demands for liquid assets (or for
loans from commercial banks), money could rise before output rises even
though money had no causal role (King and Plosser, 1984; Tobin, 1965) .   On
the other hand, if the Federal Reserve were actively using monetary policy
to offset the effects of other factors acting to change output, there might
be no discernible relation between money and output even though money had
large real effects (Kareken and Solow, 1963)

     The Narrative Approach. The approach that we suspect in fact
underlies most economists' beliefs concerning whether nominal disturbances
matter is quite different from any purely statistical approach. We call it
the narrative approach because its central element is the identification of
"monetary shocks" through non—statistical procedures. Whether carried out
systematically or casually, the method involves using the historical record,
such as the descriptions of the process and reasoning that led to decisions
by the monetary authority and accounts of the sources of monetary



                                      1
disturbances, to identify episodes when there were large shifts in monetary
policy or in the behavior of the monetary sector that were not driven by
developments on the real side of the economy. The test of whether monetary
disturbances matter is then simply to see whether output is unusually low
following negative shocks of this type and unusually high following positive
shocks.
      In their Monetary History, Friedman and Schwartz argue that the study
of U.S. monetary history does indeed provide clear examples of large,
independent monetary disturbances. They argue further that economic
developments subsequent to the disturbances they identify provide
overwhelming evidence that monetary shocks have large real effects.
Evidence of the same kind, gathered and analyzed less systematically than
that presented by Friedman and Schwartz, is also often cited in support of
the view that monetary policy matters. References to the "Voicker
deflation" represent a common example of this type of argument. It is
frequently argued that the fact that the commitment by the Federal Reserve
in 1979 to a highly contractionary monetary policy to reduce inflation was
followed by the most severe recession in postwar U.S. history provides
powerful evidence of the real effects of monetary policy. Both this casual
analysis and the more systematic analysis of Friedman and Schwartz have
probably been more persuasive than purely statistical studies because the
isolation of shocks from the historical record can overcome the reverse
causation problem that plagues any regression of output on money.1
      While the narrative approach has many virtues, implementing it is not
straightforward. There are two specific problems that must be addressed.
The first and more important possible difficulty involves the isolation of
monetary shocks. Inherently, there cannot be a completely mechanical rule
for determining when the historical record indicates that a shock has
occurred. Moreover, the identification of shocks generally occurs
retrospectively, and thus the researcher may know the subsequent behavior of
money and output. The fact that the selection of disturbances is judgmental
and retrospective introduces the possibility that there may be an
unconscious bias toward, for example, searching harder for negative monetary
shocks in periods preceding sharp declines in money and output than in other
periods. Such a bias could cause one to misclassify shocks and to conclude
that monetary disturbances had real consequences when they had none.
      The second potential difficulty arises in determining whether the
shocks that are identified are followed by unusual output movements.


                                      2
Neither Friedman and Schwartz nor those who cite similar informal evidence
in support of the importance of monetary disturbances test formally whether
the behavior of output in the aftermath of the disturbances that they
identify is in fact systematically unusual. Indeed, Friedman and Schwartz
explicitly deny that monetary shocks have consistent and precise real
consequences, arguing their effects occur with long and variable lags.
Carried to an extreme, an absence of statistical tests and a belief in
irregular and often quite long lags could render the hypothesis that
monetary shocks have important real effects void of testable implications.
More moderately, these factors could cause the strength and significance of
the effect to be overstated, and could compound the effects of biases in the
selection of shocks.

      Overview. This discussion of the benefits and dangers of the
narrative approach leads us to believe that to answer the question of
whether nominal disturbances have real effects, the narrative approach
should be used, but that it should be used carefully and systematically.
That is the goal of this paper.
      We pursue that goal in two ways. The first is by reexamining Friedman
and Schwartz's evidence concerning the real effects of monetary policy,
particularly their identification of monetary disturbances. Despite the
immense importance of their work in forming economists' views concerning the
real effects of monetary forces, little research has been devoted to the
question of how successful Friedman and Schwartz in fact are in isolating
independent monetary disturbances. In Section 2 we therefore investigate
whether there appears to be any unintended bias in Friedman and Schwartz's
choices of monetary shocks.2 We also use this critical analysis of the
Monetary History to suggest improvements to Friedman and Schwartz's
techniques.
     The second and more important way in which we pursue the narrative
approach is by proposing and implementing a test using this approach for the
postwar United States. Friedman and Schwartz, writing in the early l960s,
necessarily focused on the period before World War II. We argue, however,
that the postwar era provides a better setting for employing their approach.
In particular, we argue that it is possible to come much closer in the
postwar than in the prewar or interwar periods to the ideal of using a
precise and unambiguous rule for identifying a central set of major monetary
disturbances. Thus we believe that the postwar era provides not just



                                     3
additional, but superior evidence concerning whether nominal shocks matter.
This new test is the subject of Section 3. We describe the class of
disturbances that we wish to identify, our procedures for identifying them,
and our tests of whether the behavior of output in the wake of those
disturbances provides evidence for or against the view that nominal
disturbances have important real consequences.
      Finally, in Section 4 we return to the evidence from the interwar era.
Having discussed in Section 2 whether Friedman and Schwartz's identification
of monetary disturbances might involve some unintended bias, in this section
we propose what we think is a more appropriate list of major independent
monetary disturbances for the interwar period. Then, paralleling the test
in Section 3, we ask whether real activity responds systematically to those
disturbances.


2. FRIEDMM      AND SCHWARTZ CHALLENGED


     The   purpose   of this section is to examine how successful and
persuasive Friedman and Schwartz are in isolating independent monetary
disturbances. We do this for two reasons. First, because the Monetary
History has been so influential in shaping economists' beliefs, it is
important to approach the work critically and to evaluate anew the quality
of the evidence that it presents. Second, because the main purpose of our
paper is to extend the narrative approach to the postwar era, it is useful
to identify any potential shortcomings in Friedman and Schwartz's classic
work so that we can avoid them in our own study of the historical record.


2.1 Friedman and Schwartz's Major Monetary Shocks

     To set the stage, we begin by describing the episodes that Friedman
and Schwartz identify as the most important monetary shocks during the
period covered by the Monetary History. In keeping with the view that the
most compelling evidence that Friedman and Schwartz provide of the
importance of monetary shocks comes from the most dramatic events that they
describe, we limit our attention to the episodes that they emphasize in
their summaries of their work (1963a, ch. 13; 1963b, pp. 48-55); we do not
consider the various more minor or less clear—cut episodes that they cite as
providing further evidence of the importance of monetary disturbances. In
addition, we limit ourselves to the shocks in the period after 1919. For
the period before World War I, all of the shocks that Friedman and Schwartz


                                          4
emphasize are related to financial panics. We do not focus on the panics
both because the degree to which panics represent independent monetary
disturbances is a particularly complex issue and because Friedman and
Schwartz place less emphasis on the panics than on the interwar shocks.3
     With these restrictions, there remain four episodes in which Friedman
and Schwartz identify major monetary shocks. Three of these episodes
involve overt actions on the part of the Federal Reserve. In their chapter
entitled "A Summing Up," Friedman and Schwartz state:

     On three occasions the System deliberately took policy steps of major
     magnitude which cannot be regarded as necessary or inevitable economic
     consequences of contemporary changes in money income and prices. Like
     the crucial experiments of the physical scientist, the results are so
     consistent and sharp as to leave little doubt about their
     interpretation. The dates are January - June 1920, October 1931, and
     June 1936 — January 1937 (1963a, p. 688)

The fourth episode that Friedman and Schwartz characterize as a major
monetary shock is the Federal Reserve's inaction in the face of the severe
economic downturn of 1929-31. They describe the events of this period as
representing 'a fourth crucial experiment" (1963a, p. 694)
     Before we sketch Friedman and Schwartz's interpretations of these four
episodes, it is useful to point out that by a monetary shock Friedman and
Schwartz do not mean a monetary movement entirely unrelated to underlying
economic developments. Instead, what they mean by a monetary shock is a
movement that is unusual given economic developments ——   that   is, a movement
that would not have occurred in other periods or other circumstances given
the pattern of real activity. For the four critical episodes described
below, the unusual movements in money arose, in Friedman and Schwartz's
view, from a conjunction of economic events, monetary institutions, and the
doctrines and beliefs of the time and of the particular individuals
determining policy.

      January - June 1920. Despite high output, low unemployment, and
considerable inflation, monetary policy remained loose in the aftermath of
World War I.   The major reasons for this monetary ease included a desire to
avoid raising the costs to the Treasury of financing outstanding debt, a
desire not to inflict capital losses on the purchasers of the final issue of
war bonds, and a belief that persuasion rather than high interest rates
should be used to discourage borrowing. Then, in November 1919 the Federal
Reserve tightened policy somewhat, raising the discount rate from 4 to 4
3/4%. In 1920 the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate two additional


                                      5
times, from 4 3/4 to 6% in January and from 6 to 7% in June. According to
Friedman and Schwartz, there were two central reasons for the adoption of
this extraordinarily restrictive policy at a time when a downturn was in
fact already beginning. The first was a concern with the System's own
reserve position rather than with broader economic conditions. The second
was the fact —-   hardly   surprising, given the brief history of the System --
that   the Federal Reserve misunderstood the lags with which monetary policy
affected the economy. As a result, the Federal System repeatedly tightened
policy before previous restrictions had had a chance to have an impact.
(1963a, pp. 221—39.)

       October 1931. Britain's departure from the gold standard led to
widespread fears that the United States would also leave gold, and thus to a
vast gold outflow. The Federal Reserve responded by raising the discount
rate from 1 1/2 to 3 1/2% in two steps in October 1931. Friedman and
Schwartz consider this restrictive policy highly unusual because the economy
was so severely depressed in 1931 and its condition was continuing to
deteriorate. (1963a, pp. 315—17, 380—84.)

        June 1936 -   January 1937. By 1935 banks had accumulated vast excess
reserves. Federal Reserve officials believed that these excess reserves
reflected a low demand for loans and that as a result open—market operations
would for the most part simply alter the relative shares of excess reserves
and government bonds in banks' portfolios. Motivated mainly by a desire to
put the System in a position where it could use open—market operations to
affect the economy in the future should it wish to do so, and partly by a
wish to respond to the inflation and rapid output growth that had occurred
since 1933, in 1936 and 1937 the Federal Reserve doubled reserve
requirements in three steps. Friedman and Schwartz believe that the excess
reserves were in fact a reflection of banks' desire for increased liquidity
in the aftermath of the widespread banking panics of 1929—33. As a result,
the increase in reserve requirements led to a massive contraction of lending
as banks worked to restore their excess reserves. Thus, according to
Friedman and Schwartz, the Federal Reserve inadvertently caused a major
monetary contraction because it misunderstood the motives of bankers.
Furthermore, they believe that the unfamiliarity of reserve requirements as
a policy instrument (the System had been granted authority to vary reserve
requirements only in 1933) led to an unintentionally large shift in policy,



                                          6
arid that the discreteness of the policy shift made reversal politically
difficult.    (1963a, pp. 449—62, 575—45.)

        The early stages of the Great Depression. Friedman and Schwartz argue
that,   beginning   most likely with the evidence of a severe downturn in the
spring of 1930 and certainly by the time of the first wave of banking
failures in late 1930, similar economic developments would not have led to
such large declines in the money stock under the National Banking System,
under the Federal Reserve in the 1910s and 1920s, or under the Federal
Reserve in the postwar era. They therefore conclude that despite the
absence of any acts of commission on the part of the Federal Reserve, the
large fall in money during the first year and a half of the Depression --
before Britain's departure from the gold standard in September 1931 --
represents a monetary shock. (1963a, pp. 308—16, 367—80, 691-94j

2.2 Is There Bias in Friedman      and   Schwartz's Selection of Monetary Shocks?

        Friedman and Schwartz's definition of what constitutes a monetary
shock or a "crucial experiment'1 is not highly precise: an episode involves
a monetary shock if monetary developments were highly unusual given all of
the relevant developments on the real side of the economy. As a result,
Friedman and Schwartz's judgment is central to their identification of
shocks; they must weigh a broad range of factors and decide whether the
evidence as a whole indicates that a shock occurred. There is therefore a
potential for subtle biasing of the selection of shocks. If, for example,
their hope was to find evidence of the importance of monetary forces, they
may have had an unintentional tendency to search somewhat harder for
negative monetary shocks in periods before large declines in economic
activity than at other times.
        In this section we argue that this danger is genuine. We suggest that
there does appear to be some unintended bias in Friedman and Schwartz's
choice of shocks. This conclusion is based both on an analysis of episodes
that Friedman and Schwartz do not identify as shocks and on the consistent
presence of contractionary non—monetary forces in the shocks that they do
identify.

        Candidate   Episodes Not Included by Friedman and Schwartz. Suppose
that Friedman and Schwartz had a tendency to search more carefully for
"exogenous" negative monetary shocks before times of large falls in output



                                           7
than at other times. One would then expect there to be events Friedman and
Schwartz did not include in their list of independent negative monetary
disturbances that it is reasonable to think that they would have included
had those events been followed by significant declines in output. We
believe that there are two such episodes in the interwar period.

     1933. A massive wave of banking failures began in the final months of
1932 and worsened in early 1933. In addition, expectations of that
Roosevelt might devalue or abandon the gold standard on taking office caused
large gold outflows and led to an increase in the discount rate from 2 1/2
to 3 1/2% in February to defend gold. By February banking conditions had
degenerated into panic, causing widespread bank failures. The failures were
in turn followed by the declaration of bank holidays in many states. On his
inauguration in March, Roosevelt imposed a nationwide banking holiday -- a
step that, in Friedman and Schwartz's view, was extraordinarily disruptive
of the financial system and much more drastic than was needed.     (Friedman
and Schwartz, l963a, pp. 324—32, 349—50, 389—91, 421—34.)
      The events of these months have the features of what under different
circumstances Friedman and Schwartz would be willing to describe as a
monetary shock, or indeed as several shocks. At other times widespread
banking failures and panic conditions much milder than those of early 1933
are considered to be monetary disturbances. The gold outflow and the
increase in the discount rate to defend the gold standard despite the
depressed level of real activity clearly represent unusual monetary
developments, similar to those of the fall of 1931. And the Bank Holiday
shares with the episodes emphasized by Friedman and Schwartz the feature
that one can arg-ue that it represents a major contractionary step arising
from an inadequate understanding of the workings of the financial system.
In sum, it seems extremely plausible that if the depression had continued to
worsen in 1933, Friedman and Schwartz would have characterized the events of
January — March 1933 as a fifth "crucial experiment."4

      1941. In September 1941 the Federal Reserve announced a decision to
raise reserve requirements from 22 1/2 to 25% in November. The increase was
the same size as each of the last two steps of the three—step increase in
reserve requirements in 1936—37. This is important because it is these last
two increases that Friedman and Schwartz emphasize in analyzing 1937.
Furthermore, as Friedman and Schwartz note of the 1937 increases, the open-
market operations needed to create a comparable reduction in excess reserves


                                       8
would have been extraordinarily large (1963a, pp. 531-32). But they attach
little importance to the 1941 increase. They simply state that:

     [banks] made no attempt to rebuild their excess reserves, as they
     had after the increases of 1936 and 1937, but rather proceeded to
     continue to reduce their remaining excess reserves. The effect
     of the reserve requirement increase shows up only in a slackened
     rate of rise of the deposit—reserve ratio ... (p. 556)

     The striking contrast between Friedman and Schwartz's interpretations
of the reserve requirement increases of 1936—37 and 1941 suggests that they
commit the natural error of using the subsequent behavior of money as a
critical factor in identifying monetary disturbances. This is inappropriate
because the central reason for employing the narrative approach is that
monetary changes may be partly endogenous. And if money is in part governed
by output, money could have risen even after a contractionary monetary
shock, because non—monetary factors were clearly expansionary in 1941. If
the 1941 increase in reserve requirements had been followed by falls in the
deposit-reserve ratio and in money, it appears plausible that Friedman and
Schwartz would have described the action as a monetary shock. Because the
Federal Reserve remained unfamiliar with changes in reserve requirements,
Friedman and Schwartz could reasonably have argued that the System again
committed the error of causing a drastic shift in policy when only a modest
one was intended.5

      The Episodes Included by Friedman      and Schwartz.   A second argument
that there appears to be some bias in Friedman and Schwartz's identification
of monetary shocks focuses on the episodes that they do select. If their
selections are unbiased, the effects of non—monetary factors will not be
systematically different following the monetary episodes identified than
they are at other times. If the selections are biased, on the other hand,
there will be a tendency for episodes in which other factors were acting to
increase output to be excluded from a list of negative monetary disturbances
and for episodes in which other forces are acting to reduce output to be
included. We argue that in all of the episodes identified by Friedman and
Schwartz as involving independent negative monetary shocks (with the
possible exception of the period following Britain's departure from gold in
1931), non-monetary forces appear to have been strongly contractionary.

      January — June   1920.   It is not difficult to find candidate non-
monetary explanations of the decline in output from 1919 to 1921. With the



                                         9
end of World War I and the large—scale immediate postwar relief efforts,
government spending fell sharply. In addition, it is often argued that the
postponement of purchases of durable goods during the war contributed to the
high level of demand in 1919 and the subsequent fall in 1920-21 (Gordon,
1974, pp. 19—20, for example) .   Indeed, Friedman and Schwartz agree that
non—monetary forces contributed to the downturn and may have made it
inevitable (1963a, p. 237)
      Two comparisons suggest that non—monetary forces were important in
1920—21. The first comparison is with other countries. Declining output
was not unique to the United States. In 1919—21, there were falls in output
much larger than that in the United States in the United Kingdom, Italy,
Norway, and Canada (Maddison, 1982, Table A7) . The breadth of the downturn
suggests that the contractionary forces were broader than the idiosyncracies
of U.S. monetary policy. The second comparison is with the aftermath of
World War II. From 1918 to 1921, government purchases as a fraction of GNP
fell by 13 percentage points; real GNP rose 1.1% from 1918 to 1919 and then
fell 3.5% between 1919 and 1921.' From 1944 to 1947, the share of
government purchases in GNP fell by 35 percentage points; real GNP fell by
25.8%. That is, the fall in total output relative to the fall in government
purchases was considerably larger after World War II than after World War
I.' This comparison suggests that in isolation the decline in government
spending between 1919 and 1921 may have been depressing the economy greatly.

      October 1931. We view the Federal Reserve's response to Britain's
departure from gold as perhaps Friedman and Schwartz's clearest example of a
monetary disturbance not obviously complicated by strongly contractionary
non-monetary forces. Nonetheless, two non—monetary forces do appear to have
been acting to reduce output after October 1931. First, fiscal policy
turned contractionary, though less sharply than in 1918-20. The enactment
of a massive tax increase in 1932 reduced E. Cary Brown's measure of the
full employment deficit from 3.6% of GNP in 1931 to 1.8% in 1932 and then to
0.5% in 1933 (Brown, 1956, Table 1, col. 14) .   Second, it was during the
period 1930-32 that the erection of massive tariff barriers and the
consequent collapse of world trade reached its height, a development often
thought to be central to the deepening of the depression (Kindleberger,
1986, pp. 123—26)

      June 1936 -   January 1937. Two non-monetary forces were acting to
decrease output in 1937. The first was fiscal policy. From 1936 to 1937


                                       10
Brown's measure of the full employment deficit moved toward surplus by 2.4%
of GNP, reflecting the end of the 1936 veterans' bonus and the first
widespread collection of social security payroll taxes. The second was
labor market developments. The enactment of the Wagner Act in 1935 led, in
a common interpretation, to large inventory accumulation in anticipation of
labor market strife and wage increases; both the end of the inventory
accumulation and the appearance of the anticipated strikes and wage
increases then contributed to the downturn in 1937 (Kindleberger, pp. 270-
71) .   Over half of the fall in real GNP from 1936 to 1937 took the form of a
sharp reversal of inventory investment.
        In addition, it is essential to Friedman and Schwartz's interpretation
of economic developments in this period that banks strongly desired to hold
large excess reserves and that they therefore responded to the increase in
reserve requirements by moving to restore their excess reserves. But the
behavior of reserve holdings appears strikingly counter to this
interpretation: there was no discernible change in the behavior of reserves
as a fraction of deposits until December 1937, seventeen months after the
first increase in reserve requirements was announced. By this time the
declines in money and industrial production were largely complete.'

        The early stages of the Great Depression. The issue of whether
monetary or non—monetary forces were primarily responsible for the initial
two years or so of the collapse of economic activity that began in 1929 has
been sufficiently debated that there is no need for us to argue that the
case in favor of a monetary interpretation is not clear—cut. As in the
other episodes we have discussed, non—monetary forces were strongly
contractionary during this period (see Temin, 1976, and P.omer, 1988b)
Indeed, Friedman and Schwartz do not argue that monetary policy (or some
other aspect of monetary developments) was unusually contractionary from the
stock market crash in October 1929 through the spring of 1930, a period that
saw industrial production fall by 13%. Moreover, from the spring through
October 1930, when industrial production fell an additional 16%, according
to Friedman and Schwartz monetary developments were unusual in at most a
passive sense -- monetary authorities failed to intervene in the way that
they normally would have in such a crisis. This view appears to imply that
although monetary forces played a role, the initiating shocks during this
period were not monetary. And indeed, as has been extensively discussed,
the behavior of interest rates appears more consistent with the non—monetary



                                       11
than the monetary interpretation of the initial downturn (Temin, 1976;
Hamilton, 1987) .       In   addition, by late 1930 there were additional non-
monetary forces at work: the collapse of world trade (discussed above) and
possible non-monetary effects of bankruptcies and bank failures (Bernanke,
1983)


2.3 Conclusion
        This discussion of possible bias in Friedman and Schwartz's
identification of shocks is not meant to imply that the evidence from the
interwar era is unsupportive of the view that monetary disturbances have
important real consequences. It does, however, suggest that their evidence
may not be as decisive as it once seemed. The fact that Friedman and
Schwartz exclude some apparent negative shocks that were followed by
improvements in economic performance, and the fact that the effects of the
monetary shocks that they identify appear to have been compounded by adverse
non-monetary factors, both imply that monetary shocks, by themselves, may be
less potent than Friedman and Schwartz argued.
        Our analysis of Friedman and Schwartz's identification of shocks also
suggests an important lesson about using the narrative approach. The main
reason that there is room for unconscious bias in Friedman and Schwartz's
identification of shocks is that they use a very broad definition of what
constitutes a shock: a shock occurs whenever monetary policy is "unusual"
given the state of the real economy. Friedman and Schwartz are forced to
adopt this definition because there is so much variation in monetary
institutions, in the theoretical framework adhered to by central bankers,
and in the particulars of important monetary episodes in the interwar era.
Because of this variation, it is impossible to lay out a clear and workable
set of criteria that can be used to identify monetary shocks throughout the
interwar period. Therefore, an natural way to attempt to improve on what
Friedman and Schwartz do is to apply the narrative approach to an era where
a more precise definition of a shock can be specified.


3. FRIEDMAIi .ND SCHWARTZ EXTENDED


        As   a   laboratory for a test of the real effects of monetary
disturbances, the postwar era stands in admirable contrast to the interwar
years. At least in comparison to the interwar era, the Federal Reserve in
the postwar era has had a reasonably stable view of the functioning of the


                                             12
economy and of the role of monetary policy. As a result, there have been
important similarities across major monetary episodes. Thus, while judgment
still plays a role in the identification of shocks —— as it must do when
identification is based on the historical record —— its role can be much
smaller than in the earlier period. In addition, for the postwar period
there are extensive contemporary records of the nature and motives of
Federal Reserve policy. This is useful because reliance on contemporaneous
judgments of the sources and intents of shifts in policy again reduces the
scope for judgment and unconscious bias.
      In this section we therefore use the narrative approach to study
whether monetary policy shocks in the postwar era have had important real
effects. The section is divided into two parts. Section 3.1 discusses our
procedures for identifying monetary shocks in the postwar era and sketches
the evidence underlying our choices of monetary shocks. Section 3.2
presents evidence on whether these monetary shocks affect output. It
includes both informal evidence and a statistical test of whether the
monetary disturbances we identify are followed by unusual movements in real
output.


3.1 The Identification of Monetary Shocks

     Definition. Like Friedman and Schwartz, we use the historical record
to identify monetary shocks. We employ, however, a much narrower definition
of what constitutes a shock. In particular, we count as a shock only
episodes in which the Federal Reserve attempted to exert a contractionary
influence on the economy in order to reduce inflation. That is, we focus on
times when the Federal Reserve attempted not to offset perceived or
prospective increases in aggregate demand but to actively shift the
aggregate demand curve back in response to what it perceived to be
"excessive" inflation. Or, to put it another way, we look for times when
concern about the current level of inflation led the Federal Reserve to
attempt to induce a recession (or at least a "growth recession")
     This definition of a monetary shock is clearly very limited. It
excludes both monetary contractions that are generated by concerns other
than inflation and all monetary expansions. This single—minded focus on
negative shocks to counteract inflation has two crucial advantages. Its
most obvious advantage is that it defines a shock in narrow and concrete
terms. Rather than looking for times when monetary policy was unusual given
everything else that was going on in the economy, as Friedman and Schwartz


                                     13
do, we look only for times when the Federal Reserve specifically intended to
use the tools that it had available to attempt to create a recession to cure
inflation. This precise definition greatly limits the role of judgment in
identifying monetary shocks.
      The second reason for our limited focus is that we believe that policy
decisions to attempt to cure inflation come as close as practically possible
to being independent of factors that affect real output. In other words, we
do not believe that the Federal Reserve states an intent to cause a
recession to lower inflation only at times when a recession would occur in
any event. This belief rests partly on an assumption that trend inflation
by itself does not affect the dynamics of real output. We find this
assumption reasonable: there appears to be no plausible channel other than
policy through which trend inflation could cause large short-run output
swings. By contrast, other factors that are important to the formation of
monetary policy are likely to affect real activity directly. For example,
because shifts to expansionary monetary policy in the postwar era almost
always stem from a desire to halt declines in real output, these policy
changes are obviously far from independent of factors that affect the path
of output. As a result, it would be difficult to distinguish any real
effects of expansionary shifts from whatever natural recovery mechanism the
economy may have. It is for exactly this reason that we focus only on
negative shocks.
      Our belief that anti-inflationary shifts in policy are not simply
occurring whenever a recession is about to occur also rests on a belief that
the Federal Reserve is not always in fact reacting to some other factor —-
such as a large adverse supply shock or a temporary output boom —-   that
might by itself lead to a recession. As our descriptions of the specifics
of the episodes that we consider will show, this does not appear to be the
case. Indeed, as we describe, the inflation to which the Federal Reserve
responds often appears to be the largely result of past shocks rather than
of current real developments. Furthermore, in our statistical work below we
attempt to test both for the possibility that anti—inflationary policy
shifts are correlated with other factors that potentially affect real output
and for the possibility that inflation directly affects real output. We
find no evidence of either of these effects.
      To actually discern the intentions of the Federal Reserve we rely
entirely on contemporary Federal Reserve records —— the "Record of Policy
Actions" of the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee


                                      14
(FOMC) and, until their discontinuance in 1976, the minutes of FOMC
meetings. To identify a shock from these sources we look both for a clear
statement of a belief that the current level of inflation needed to be
lowered and some indication that output consequences would be sought, or at
least tolerated, to bring the reduction about. In this process we only
consider contemporaneous (or nearly contemporaneous) statements of the
Federal Reserve's intent. We do not consider retrospective discussions of
intent because such descriptions could be biased by a knowledge of the
subsequent behavior of real activity.

     Results. On the basis of Federal Reserve records, we identify six
times since World War II when the Federal Reserve moved to attempt to induce
a recession to reduce inflation. They are October 1947, September 1955,
December 1968, April 1974, August 1978, and October 1979. In each case, the
Federal Reserve appears to have made a deliberate decision to sacrifice real
output to lower inflation. In this section we describe the evidence from
contemporaneous Federal Reserve sources of shifts in the objectives of
monetary policy during these episodes. In addition, to provide further
information about our selection procedure, we describe two episodes that we
do not classify as independent monetary disturbances. One occurred in 1966
when the System shifted to tighter policy out of a desire to prevent
increases in aggregate demand rather than out of a desire to contract
demand. The other occurred over the extended period 1975-78 when the
Federal Reserve expressed considerable concern about inflation but did not
appear to be willing to sacrifice real output to reduce it.

      October 1947. With the end of World War II, inflation became the
Federal Reserve's central concern. Two factors, however, stopped the
Federal Reserve from shifting to significantly tighter policy in the first
few years after the end of the war. The first was the wartime policy of
pegging interest rates on both short-term and long—term government bonds.
By June 1946 there was considerable sentiment on the FOMC in favor of
pursuing policies that would cause short—term interest rates to rise
(Minutes, 1946, pp. 55-56, for example) . But obtaining a consensus in favor
of such policies and then reaching an agreement with the Treasury to permit
short-term rates to increase was a lengthy process; the pegging of short-
term interest rates did not end until July 1947. Second, although inflation
was the primary concern, there was also fear that the end of the war would
lead to renewed depression.


                                        15
     In October 1947, with short—term interest rates no longer fixed and
fears of depression allayed, the Federal Reserve began a series of
contractiOflarY measures. These actions included open—market operations
designed to increase short—term interest rates, an increase in the discount
rate, and an increase in reserve requirements for banks in central reserve
cities. The motive behind these measures was a desire to reduce inflation.
At the June 1947 FOMC meeting,

     it was [the) opinion [of the chief Federal Reserve economist
     present) that throughout the war and postwar period there had
     been too many fears of postwar deflation, with the result that
     actions which should have been taken to counteract inflation were
     not taken, because of the fear that they would result in
     contraction, and that, although any downturn should be taken care
     of at the proper time, the important thing at the moment was to
     stop abnormal pressures on the inflationary side. (Minutes,
     1947, p. 111.)
He held this view even though he believed that economic conditions were not
strengthening. The views of the other Board economist present were
summarized succinctly: "He thought that there would and should be a mild
recession" (Minutes, 1947, p. 112) . In sum, beginning in late 1947 the
Federal Reserve was actively attempting to reduce aggregate demand in order
to reduce inflation.

      September 1955. Beginning in roughly June 1954, in response to
evidence of the end of the 1953-54 recession, the Federal Reserve ceased
pursuing what it perceived to be an actively expansionary policy. This
change, of course, does not represent a monetary shock. The Federal Reserve
was not attempting to reduce aggregate demand; rather, it simply believed
that active stimulus was no longer needed for output to grow.
      Beginning in early 1955 considerable concern was expressed by the
Federal Reserve about inflation.' This concern does not seem to have had an
important effect on policy during the first part of the year. But in
approximately September 1955 the character of policy appears to have
changed. The Federal Reserve actively began to attempt to contract
aggregate demand even though members of the FOMC did not believe that output
growth, or expected future output growth, was stronger than before. At the
FOMC meeting of September 14, for example, despite the fact that "review of
the available data suggested that the economy had entered a phase of
decelerating advance, ...  itwas the judgment of the Committee that (the)
situation called at least for the maintenance of, and preferably some slight



                                      16
increase in, the restraining pressure it had been exerting through open
market operations." The reason was that "price advances were occurring in
considerable numbers, with further widespread increases in prospect" (both
quotations are from 1955 Annual Report, p. 105) .     In
                                                    October they suggested
that a mild downturn might not be undesirable: "the Committee concluded the
situation called for continuing the present policy of restraint" despite the
fact that a "tendency toward a downturn in the economy ...     might develop"
(1955 Annual Report, p. 106) .   In   November the Committee wished to dispel
"any idea of an easing of System policy" (1955 Annual Report, p. 108;
emphasis added)
      The Federal Reserve's conduct in the first part of 1956 lends
additional support to the view that System policy shifted in the fall of
1955. During this period the FOMC felt that no change in policy was called
for in the face of evidence of essentially zero output growth. This
indicates that expansion at less than trend rates was what they were
seeking.3° In March the Committee explicitly took the view that it should
"combat an inflationary cost—price spiral" despite "the risk of incurring
temporary unemployment" (1956 Annual Report, p. 26). We conclude that the
Federal Reserve shifted to a policy of actively attempting to reduce
aggregate demand to combat inflation in late 1955.

     1966. Despite its fame, the "credit crunch" of 1966 does not
represent a monetary shock by our criteria. The reason is that the Federal
Reserve's stated intent was clearly not to reduce aggregate demand, but
rather to prevent outward shifts in aggregate demand that it believed would
otherwise have occurred. In December 1965, for example, the System raised
the discount rate and acted to increase other interest rates in response to
evidence that "economic activity was increasing vigorously and that the
outlook appeared more expansive than previously," not Out of a desire to
induce a contraction (1965 Annual Report, p. 150) .        The perception of the
economy's strength was based not just on current data but also on
projections of growing military expenditures because of the Vietnam War and
survey evidence that consumers and firms were planning to increase their
spending. The Federal Reserve stated explicitly that the purpose of the
shift in policy "was not to cut back the pace of credit flows but to dampen
mounting demands on banks for still further credit extensions" (1965 Annual
Report, p. 64).




                                         17
      The same pattern continued through August 1966. In February, the
Committee's perception was that "business activity continued to advance
vigorously —— and the outlook was becoming increasingly expansive," and that
"recent and prospective economic developments clearly called for added
policy measures to dampen the rise in aggregate demands" (1966 Annual
Report, pp. 127, 129) .    In   August, "the economic outlook remained expansive,
and prospects were for continuing high levels of resource use and strong
upward pressures on wages and prices." Military, investment, and
consumption spending were all viewed as contributing to the expansion (1966
Annual Report, p. 171)
      Thus the Federal Reserve's shift to tighter monetary policy in 1965-66
does not belong on a list of episodes in which the Federal Reserve was
actively attempting to induce a downturn. By our criteria, it would be no
more appropriate to include this episode than to include, for example, the
shift to tighter policy in 1950 to counteract the expansion that the Federal
Reserve expected because of the outbreak of the Korean War."

      December 1968. From mid-1967 to late 1968, the Federal Reserve
gradually tried to adopt tighter policies as it became clear that the "mini-
recession" of 1966—67 would not turn into a full—fledged downturn and as
growth became stronger. As before, such a shift in the specifics of
monetary policy in response to economic developments does not represent a
monetary shock. But at roughly the end of 1968 there appears to have been a
change in the goals of policy: the Federal Reserve began to feel that it
should act to reduce inflation. There were frequent references to "the
prevailing inflationary psychology," to the fact that "inflationary
expectations remained widespread," to "expectations of continuing
inflation," and so on.'2    Concern about inflation caused the Federal
Reserve to attempt to maintain tight monetary policy despite evidence of
considerably weaker real growth. In March 1969, for example, despite
reductions in present and projected growth, "the Committee agreed that, in
light of the persistence of inflationary pressures and expectations, the
existing degree of monetary restraint should be continued at present" (1969
Annual Report, p. 121) .    In   May, "The Committee took note of the signs of
some slowing in the economic expansion and of the indications of stringency
in financial markets. In view of the persistence of strong inflationary
pressures and expectations, however, the members agreed that a relaxation of
the existing degree of monetary restraint would not be appropriate at this



                                           18
time" (1969 Annual Report, p. 145). In October, faced with projections of
essentially no real growth over the coming three quarters, "the Committee
decided that a relaxation of monetary restraint would not be appropriate at
this time in light of the persistence of inflationary pressures and
expectations" (1969 Annual Report, pp. 185—86) . The considerations guiding
monetary policy were similar at most other meetings during the year, and
inflation and inflationary expectations received great attention and concern
throughout. The intent to do more than offset expected increases in
aggregate demand is clear.'3

     April 1974. The Federal Reserve responded to the oil embargo that
started in October 1973 with an attempt to loosen policy somewhat to
mitigate the contractionary influences and uncertainty generated by the
embargo. With the lifting of the embargo in March 1974 and the end of wage
and price controls in April, the Federal Reserve was faced with a rate of
inflation even higher than one that it had already considered excessive in
the fall of 1973. It responded with an active effort at contraction.
Throughout the spring and early summer, whenever there was conflict between
the System's short—run interest rate and money targets, the FOMC, in
contrast to its practice in earlier years, resolved the doubts in whichever
way produced the higher interest rate. Indeed, on several occasions the
Committee pursued (or accepted) higher interest rates despite the fact that
monetary growth was within its target range.11 This occurred in an
environment where little or no real growth was taking place or was expected
in the near future. The motive for the attempts at contraction was
inflation. There were references to "the persistence of inflation and of
inflationary psychology" and "the need for policy actions to counter
inflationary expectations." In one typical discussion, the central
considerations were described as "the rise in market interest rates, the
strong performance of the monetary aggregates, and —— more broadly —- the
rapid advances in prices and costs."

      1975—78. At the end of the 1973-75 recession in early 1975, the
Federal Reserve faced a rate of inflation that was high by historical
standards. Over the next few years, inflation was a constant concern of the
System. The level of inflation was often cited as a reason for tight
policy, and policy was frequently described as "anti-inflationary" or as
based on an underlying objective of a gradual return to stable prices. Thus



                                       19
one can arg-ue that the Federal Reserve was attempting to shift the aggregate
demand curve back throughout this period.
     In our judgment, however, this interpretation of Federal Reserve
objectives would be incorrect. Given the level of inflation, expressions of
concern about inflation, and of desires to reduce inflation, were
inevitable. But the actual commitment to combat inflation appears to have
been weak. It was not until April 1976 that "it was observed that this
might be an opportune time for the Committee to take a small step toward its
longer—range objective of returning growth in the monetary aggregates toward
rates consistent with general price stability" (1976 Annual Report, p. 203)
Target annual monetary growth rates, which were not the central focus of
policy, were lowered only one to two percentage points over the next two
years, and little other explicit anti—inflationary action was taken. More
importantly, the few comments that relate to the output or employment goals
of policy reveal that the Federal Reserve was not attempting to cause
discernible output sacrifices to reduce inflation.   In February 1978, one
FOMC member expressed the view that "a realistic objective for the
unemployment rate now was considerably higher than it used to be, perhaps as
high as 5 1/2 to 6 per cent" (1978 Annual Report, p. 132) .   This   suggests
that previously policy had been aiming at an even lower rate. In May of
that year, when the unemployment rate was 6%, "a few members observed that
    it would be desirable for growth in real output to diminish in the
second half of this year toward a rate that could be sustained for the
longer term," again implying that the Federal Reserve had previously been
aiming for growth above trend rates (1978 Annual Report, p. 176)

     August 1978. After several years of expressing concern about
inflation but taking little concrete action to combat it, Federal Reserve
policy changed significantly in 1978. In August, the FOMC recognized the
'possibility that an appreciable slowing of inflation would prove more
difficult to achieve than previously had been anticipated" (1978 Annual
Report, p. 210) .   Steps to tighten policy began in August, and in November
the government announced a major program to strengthen the weak dollar and
combat inflation. The discount rate was raised from 7 1/4 to 9 1/2% in four
steps from August to November 1978, and reserve requirements were also
increased in November. By November the System was fairly explicit that its
objective was to cause a growth recession. The tightening of policy was
continued despite forecasts of sluggish growth, and despite the fact that



                                       20
"skepticism was expressed [by some members of the FOMC] . .   . that   growth in
output could be tapered down to a relatively slow rate without bringing on a
recession" (1978 Annual Report, p. 247)
      The tightening of policy continued in 1979. The discount rate was
raised another 1 1/2 percentage points in three steps from July to
September. During this period almost all questions about the conduct of
monetary policy were resolved on the side of tightness. When money growth
was high the System acted to raise interest rates and damp growth; when
money growth was low no actions were taken to lower interest rates and spur
growth. All of this occurred against a background of a deteriorating
forecast for short—run real growth (including a belief in the summer of 1979
that a recession was underway), which would typically have led to efforts to
stimulate the economy. This clearly indicates a desire to contract the
economy rather than just hold it steady.

      October 1979. There was another major anti-inflationary shock to
monetary policy on October 6, 1979. In effect, the Federal Reserve decided
that its measures over the previous year had been unsuccessful in reducing
inflation and that much stronger measures were needed. Although the shift
in policy was to some extent presented as a technical change, the fact that
it was intended to lead to considerably higher interest rates and lower
money growth was clear. For example, "the Committee anticipated that the
shift ... would result in ... a prompt increase ... in the federal funds
rate" (1979 Annual Report, p. 204) .   The upper end of the short-run target
range for the federal funds rate was raised by 3 3/4 percentage points,
while the lower end was essentially unchanged. It was also clear that a
central underlying objective of the change in policy was a reduction in
inflation. For example: "the purpose of this series of actions [taken on
October 6] was to assure better control over the expansion of money and bank
credit and to help curb speculative excesses in financial, foreign exchange,
and commodity markets, thereby dampening inflationary forces in the economy"
 (1979 Annual Report, p. 109)

      Intents versus Actions. Our definition of a shock and our discussion
of particular episodes makes it clear that our central concern has been with
the intentions rather than the actions of the Federal Reserve. We do this
because the same actions can occur both independently of the real economy
and in response to real events. For example, the monetary base could fall
because the Federal Reserve wished to cause a recession or because it was


                                       21
attempting to damp an expansion that it believed would otherwise have
occurred. Thus, only a narrative analysis of intentions can identify
changes in policy that are independent of the real economy.
     At the same time, however, intentions not backed up by actions would
not be expected to have large real effects. It is for this reason that we
only consider as shocks episodes when the Federal Reserve genuinely appeared
willing to accept output losses. We feel that it is only in these instances
that the Federal Reserve is likely to actually use the tools it has
available to contract the economy. In this regard, it is useful to note
that while actions were not explicitly considered in our identification of
shocks, financial market conditions did change greatly in each of the
episodes in which we identify a shock. In particular, interest rates rose
sharply. For example, from three months before our shocks to three months
after, the six-month commercial paper rate rose by an average of 29%. The
smallest increase was 16% (for the 1968 shock) and the largest 40% (for the
1955 shock) .   Thus, the Federal Reserve's intentions appear to have been
supported by actions."


3.2 Does Real Activity Respond to Monetary Shocks?

      Having identified this sequence of six postwar episodes in which the
Federal Reserve appears to have deliberately tried to cause a recession to
reduce inflation, the natural question to ask is whether recessions in fact
followed these disturbances. In this section, we provide both informal
evidence and a statistical test of the relationship between our monetary
shocks and the subsequent behavior of industrial production and unemployment
in the post—World War II period.

      Informal Evidence. We first examine the behavior of output and
unemployment after each of the postwar shocks that we have identified. The
data used in this analysis are the monthly total industrial production
series compiled by the Federal Reserve Board and the monthly unemployment
rate of all civilian workers compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics."
In both cases we use the seasonally unadjusted version of the series and
then account for seasonal movements by regressing the series on a set of
seasonal dummy variables.
      Figure 1 shows the resulting seasonally adjusted industrial production
(in logarithms) and unemployment rate series. We have drawn vertical lines
in the six months in the postwar era in which we identify monetary shocks.


                                       22
From these graphs it appears that real economic activity decreases
substantially after each of our monetary shocks. The results are
particularly striking for the unemployment series: the unemployment rate
rises sharply after each shock. Industrial production also falls
substantially after each shock, although these movements are somewhat
obscured by the high monthly variation in the series and the strong upward
trend. Another striking characteristic of Figure 1 is that there are only
two major decreases in real activity that are not preceded by monetary
shocks. Again, this feature is most apparent in the unemployment series.
The two significant rises in unemployment that are not preceded by a
monetary shock occur in 1954 (at the end of the Korean War) and in 1961.
      While these graphs are suggestive, simple plots of the data cannot
distinguish between movements in real activity caused by monetary shocks and
movements that occur because the economy may naturally tend to cycle up and
down. To abstract from the typical cyclical behavior of real activity, we
do the following. We first estimate univariate forecasting equations for
both industrial production and unemployment, and then examine the difference
between the forecasted behavior and the actual behavior of each series
following each shock. If actual activity is less than one would expect on
the basis of the univariate forecast following monetary shocks, this would
suggest that the change in Federal Reserve policy caused real activity to be
lower than it otherwise would have been.
      The data used in the regressions are the same two seasonally
unadjusted series described above. For industrial production we examine the
 data in percentage changes to account for the nonstatioriarity of the series.
 For the unemployment rate, we look at the data in levels and include a
 simple linear time trend to account for the apparent upward drift of the
 series over time. For each series, the simple forecasting equation includes
 a set of monthly dummy variables to account for typical seasonal
 fluctuations and 24 own lags.
      The own lags are included to capture the normal dynamics of the
 series. Most importantly, we wish to control for the possibility that
 Federal Reserve policy tends to turn contractionary after periods of strong
 growth that might naturally be followed by downturns even in the absence of
 a shift in monetary policy. The estimation of the unemployment equation in
 levels with a trend term included is done as an additional precaution in
 this regard. Because including a trend term can introduce bias toward
 detecting trend reversion when none is present, by using this procedure we


                                       23
may in fact be introducing some bias against finding real effects of
monetary policy.
      The results of estimating the equations suggest that our
specifications are adequate to capture the typical behavior of the two
series. The Q—statisticS of the estimated regressions show that no
significant serial correlation remains when 24 own lags are included.
Furthermore, expanding the regressions to include as many as 48 own lags
does not alter any important features of the results.
      The forecasting equations are estimated over the period 1948-87. We
then do a dynamic forecast of both the percentage change in industrial
production and the level of the unemployment rate for the 36 months
following each of the six shocks identified above. The differences between
these forecasts and actual behavior are shown in Figures 2 and 3. For
industrial production, the figure shows the cumulative error at each point
so that one can more readily identify the impact of the shock on the level
of industrial production.
      Consider first industrial production. Figure 2 shows that after each
of the six times in the postwar period that the Federal Reserve shifted to a
policy of attempting to contract output to reduce inflation, industrial
production over the next several years was considerably lower than would be
predicted on the basis of the past history of the series. The average
maximum departure of industrial production from its forecasted path over the
three year horizon considered in the figure is
-14%. The smallest maximum forecast error is —8% (for the August 1978
shock) the largest is —21% (for the October 1979 shock)
      Figure 3 shows that the results using unemployment are, with one
exception, similar to those using industrial production. The unemployment
rate two years after a monetary shock is typically 1.5 to 2.5 percentage
points higher than the value predicted from the univariate forecasting
regression. The exception is the behavior of unemployment following the
policy shift of December 1968. In this episode, though industrial
production fell sharply below its predicted path, the unemployment rate rose
only slightly more than the univariate forecasting model predicts. Figure 1
shows that unemployment rose sharply after December 1968, but from an
extremely low level. Thus, our forecasting equation is implying that the
 rise in unemployment was largely predictable simply on the basis of normal
 reversion toward trend. Since, as mentioned above, the inclusion of a trend
 term in the forecasting equation can cause the amount of trend reversion to


                                      24
be overestimated, Figure 3 may understate the size of the unforecastable
increase in unemployment in this episode.
     In short, the figures show that the negative monetary shocks that we
have identified are followed by marked downturns in real economic activity
that cannot be predicted from the past behavior of the economy.
Furthermore, the consistency of the results suggests that no one shock will
be crucial to any statistical summary of the relationship between monetary
disturbances and real output. This finding is important because although
one could imagine that in specific episodes some omitted variable (supply
shocks in 1974, for example) might be the source of both the real decline
and the Federal Reserve's policy shift, it seems unlikely that some omitted
factor is present in all six of the episodes.
      Another important feature of the results is that the forecast errors
typically do not return to zero. For every shock except that in 1947,
industrial production is substantially below its forecasted path three years
after the shock. On average over the six shocks, industrial production
after three years is 7% below the predicted level; that is, only about half
of the maximum departure from the forecasted path has been reversed.
Carrying the forecasts out further shows only a very gradual return to the
predicted path: the average forecast error is 6% after four years and 4%
after five. The same pattern is present, though somewhat less strongly, for
unemployment; after four of the six shocks, the forecast errors for
unemployment remain substantially above zero after three years.
      An extreme interpretation of this finding would be that monetary
shocks have real effects that are not only substantial but permanent.
However, as Cochrane (1988) shows, simple autoregressive procedures such as
ours cannot reliably distinguish between permanent effects and very long
lasting but nonetheless transitory ones. Hence, a more moderate
interpretation is that our results imply that monetary shocks have very
long—lived effects. In either case, since we find that purely nominal
disturbances have highly persistent effects, our results cast grave doubt on
arguments that the considerable persistence of output movements suggests
that demand disturbances cannot be an important source of output
 fluctuations (Nelson and Plosser, 1982; Campbell and Mankiw, 1987)
 Similarly, our results suggest that using the assumption that demand shocks
have only temporary effects as an identifying assumption is likely to yield
highly misleading results (Blanchard and Quab, 1988)




                                      25
      Statistical Test. To test formally whether there is an identifiable
statistical relationship between the monetary shocks that we have identified
and movements in real output, we employ the following test. To the simple
univariate forecasting equations for industrial production and unemployment
described above, we add current and lagged values of a dummy variable that
is equal to one in each of the six months in which we have identified a
change in Federal Reserve policy and zero in all other months. The impulse
response function for this expanded forecasting equation provides an
estimate of the total effect of a policy change after some horizon. The
standard error of the impulse response function provides a way of gauging
whether the effects of the nominal disturbances are statistically
significant.
      Since the dummy variable is the crucial indicator of monetary shocks,
it is useful to describe its specification more thoroughly. This variable
simply identifies the six months when the Federal Reserve made a decision to
try to cause a recession to reduce inflation. The variable does not
indicate how long the shocks lasted or attempt to differentiate the shocks
by size. The decision not to specify duration was motivated largely by the
fact that the ends of these contractionary policies are often much more
gradual and difficult to identify than the adoptions of the policies. The
decision to give each shock an equal weight was motivated by the fact that
our reading of the FOMC minutes and the Record of Policy Actions did not
provide evidence of large differences in the seventies of the intended
downturns or a way of calibrating those intentions.
      As before, the equation is estimated for both the percentage change in
industrial production and the level of the unemployment rate. The actual
equation that is estimated is:


                           11              24                36
(1)           =
                  a0
                       +
                                 ai M. +    E    b.   y_ +   E
                                                                   ck Dt_k
                           i=l             j=l               k=0


where y is either the change in log industrial production or the level of
the unemployment rate, M is a set of monthly dummy variables, and D is the
dummy variable for contractionary monetary shocks. For the unemployment
equation a simple linear time trend is also included. The regressions are
run over the period 1948—87.




                                       26
     The estimation results for the industrial production equation are
given in Table 1. Over two-thirds of the coefficients on the monetary shock
variable are negative and twelve of them have t—statistics less than -1.0.
The predominance of negative coefficients, like the pictures described
above, suggests that negative monetary shocks do indeed depress real output.
The fact that many of the coefficients have large standard errors indicates
that the timing of the response of real output is somewhat variable. This,
however, is not surprising given that we are trying to pinpoint the response
at a monthly frequency. Indeed, what is perhaps more surprising is that the
response in some of the months is estimated so precisely.
     A natural way to summarize the response of industrial production to
the monetary shock variable is to examine the impulse response function
implied by the estimated equation. In our specification, the impulse
response function traces out the effect of a unit shock to the dummy
variable (D), including the feedback effect through lagged output. The 36—
month impulse response function for the industrial production equation is
given in Fig-ure 41S The figure also shows the one standard error bands for
the impulse response function."
      The impulse response function shows that for the first several months
following a monetary shock there is little effect on real output. Output
then falls drastically at the ends of both the first and second years, with
a slight plateau early in the second year. The maximum impact occurs after
33 months and indicates that a shock causes the level of real industrial
production to be approximately 12% lower than it would have been had the
shock not occurred.
      From the confidence bands, it is clear that this effect is not only
large, but also highly statistically significant. For example, the
t-statistic for the impulse response function at 33 months is -3.4. The
effect of monetary shocks on real production is thus significantly different
from zero at the 99% confidence level.
      Another way to measure the statistical significance of our results is
to ask how likely one would be to obtain estimated effects as strong as
those shown in Figure 4 using random dates for shocks. Specifically, we
performed 200 trials of an experiment in which we replaced the dummy
variable in equation (1) with a dummy set equal to one in six months chosen
randomly over the period 1947-85. The estimated maximum depressing effect
of the Monte Carlo dummy on industrial production over a 36—month horizon
exceeded the 12% figure obtained with our dummy for genuine monetary shocks


                                      27
in just one trial. Thus, it is extremely unlikely that our results could
arise by chance.
      Figure 4 also confirms the impression gained from Figure 2 that
monetary shocks have real effects that are very long-lasting. By the end of
36 months only a quarter of the maximum negative effect of the monetary
shock has been undone. Furthermore, if one includes an additional 24 lags
of the monetary shock dummy in the basic regression and then continues the
impulse response function out an additional 24 months, the negative effects
of a monetary shock still linger. Five years after a monetary shock,
industrial production is still 7% lower than it would have been had the
Federal Reserve not decided to attempt to cause a recession.
     The empirical results for unemployment confirm those for industrial
production. Table 2 shows the coefficient estimates for the equation for
the unemployment rate. The impulse response function and standard error
bands for the unemployment regression are given in Figure 5. The figure
shows that unemployment begins to rise sharply 18 months after the shock and
reaches its maximum at 34 months. The total impact of the shock after 34
months is that the unemployment rate is 2.1 percentage points higher than it
otherwise would have been.
      The standard error bands for the impulse response function for
unemployment indicate that the depressing effect of a monetary shock is
highly statistically significant. The t-statistics are over 2.0 for all the
impulse responses after month 20 and are often over 3.0. In a Monte Carlo
experiment analogous to that for industrial production, the maximum
estimated impact of the Monte Carlo dummy on unemployment over a 36—month
horizon never exceeded 2.1 percentage points in 200 trials.
      The results of the statistical test indicate that monetary policy
shocks have potent real effects. There remains, however, the question of
whether the monetary shocks we identify actually account for a large
fraction of the total variation in real activity. Figure 1 provides
informal evidence that monetary shocks are indeed an important source of
real fluctuations. It shows not just that each of our shocks was followed
by a sharp rise in unemployment, but also that there have been only two
sharp rises in unemployment in the postwar period not preceded by such
shocks. In other words, six of the eight postwar recessions have been
preceded by decisions by the Federal Reserve to attempt to cause a downturn.
      To formalize the impression given by Figure 1, we first regress the
monthly level of the unemployment rate on a constant, seasonal dummy


                                      28
variables, and a trend. We then run the same regression including 36 lags
of our monetary shock dummy variable. That is, we run the same regression
as in (1) above, except that we do not include any of the own lags of the
unemployment rate. The equation including the monetary shock variable has a
sum of squared residuals that is 21% smaller than that of the simple
seasonal regression. This difference is very large. It implies that, by
itself, our simple dummy variable for overt Federal Reserve policy decisions
to create a recession can account for more than a fifth of the nonseasonal
variation in the postwar unemployment rate.
     These results strongly suggest that aggregate demand disturbances,
rather than real shocks, are the predominant source of economic
fluctuations. Our simple dummy variable surely captures only a small
fraction of demand disturbances. It is a very crude measure of only one
aspect of monetary policy, and it neglects all non—monetary demand
disturbances, such as changes in fiscal policy and in private demand,
entirely. Since the dummy variable alone accounts for a substantial
fraction of (non—seasonal) postwar fluctuations, it follows that aggregate
demand disturbances as a whole almost surely account for a much larger
fraction.

     Robustness. While the results appear clear-cut, one naturally worries
about the robustness of any empirical finding. In the case of this study,
the main concern is that the decisions by the Federal Reserve to try to
create a recession might be correlated with other factors.   If this is true,
then these other factors, rather than the monetary shocks we have
identified, could be the true source of the movements in real output.
     We have already provided several pieces of evidence that indicate that
this is not a likely possibility. First, the earlier part of this section
discusses the rationale given by the System for its decisions to try to
shift back the aggregate demand curve. While inflation was the proximate
cause in each case, the perceived cause of the inflation differed across the
episodes that we consider. For example, in 1968 it was wartime
expenditures, while in 1974 it was earlier oil price shocks and expansionary
monetary policy. The fact that there was no consistent source of the
inflation that the Federal Reserve wished to cure suggests that there is no
consistent alternative factor that was present in each instance of a shift
to anti-inflationary monetary policy.




                                        29
      Second, FigureS 2 and 3 show that the behavior of real activity
relative to predicted following each of our shocks is quite similar.       This
suggests that even if some other factor were causing inflation and
depressing real output in one or two of the periods in which we have
identified monetary shocks, this other factor could not be driving the
results. We have tested this assertion by eliminating each shock in turn
and examining the resulting impulse response functions. After each
elimination, the impulse response functions appear nearly identical to those
in Figures 4 and 520
      Third, our discussion of the simple forecasting equations stressed
that 24 lags of the percentage change in industrial production or the level
of the unemployment rate are adequate for capturing any natural tendency of
real activity to decline after it has been growing briskly for some time.
This means that if the Federal Reserve simply said it wished to cause a
recession whenever a temporary boom was about to end, these statements would
not have any explanatory power once the own lags were included in the
regression. The results in Figures 2—5 and Tables 1—2 above clearly show
that this is not the case.21
       In addition to these pieces of evidence, it is possible to control
explicitly for other factors that one might fear accounted for our results.
We consider three types of other factors. They are supply shocks, fiscal
policy, and inflation itself.
      Supply shocks are a natural source of concern: it is possible that
 supply shocks could both generate inflation to which the Federal Reserve
wished to respond and directly depress real output. In this regard, it is
important to point out that supply shocks that occurred in the past and were
 accommodated by expansionary aggregate demand policy are of no concern.
 These shocks would have caused the inflation that the Federal Reserve wished
 to cure but would no longer be having a depressing effect on real activity.
           To ensure that supply shocks do not account for our results, we do two
 things. First, we try eliminating the two monetary shocks that could
 plausibly be associated with the oil price rises of the l970s (1974 and
 1979) .     This   change reduces the maximum impact of a shock slightly (the
 trough of the impulse response function for industrial production is -.10
 rather than -.12), but the results are otherwise unchanged.
           Second, we add a measure of supply shocks to our regressions.
 Following conventional practice, we capture supply conditions by including
 the current and first 36 lags of the monthly percentage change in the


                                            30
relative price of food and energy in our regressions.22 We find that
accounting for supply shocks barely alters the results. For industrial
production the cumulative impact of a monetary shock is actually slightly
larger when supply shocks are included in the regression than when they are
not. For unemployment the maximum impact of a monetary shock is slightly
smaller for the expanded regression than for the simple regression. In both
cases the supply shock variable has little impact on the timing or the
significance of the impulse response functions for the monetary shock
variable 23

      Another factor that one might worry could account for our results is
fiscal policy. It could be the case that whenever the Federal Reserve
became concerned about inflation and decided to attempt to cause a
recession, the fiscal authorities also shifted to a more contractionary
policy. This possibility does not appear particularly likely. In the
Federal Reserve records there is certainly no mention that the anti—
inflationary changes in monetary policy are designed to reinforce shifts in
fiscal policy. Furthermore, given the inside lags of fiscal policy, it
seems unlikely that the fiscal authorities could change spending and taxes
to match the timing of monetary policy very closely.
      Nevertheless, it is perhaps useful to test whether a correlation
between monetary and fiscal policies could be present and could affect the
results. To do this, we add to our regressions the current and first 12
lags of the qi.iarterly change in the ratio of the nominal government budget
surplus to nominal GNP.24 This variable should obviously capture any of the
demand side effects of fiscal policy. At the same time, because the deficit
is highly correlated with government purchases, this variable should also
capture any supply side effects that government purchases might have through
the interest rate and labor supply. Thus, it can control for another
possible source of supply shocks.
      Including the fiscal policy variable lowers the cumulative effect of
the monetary shock variable only slightly. For both industrial production
and unemployment, a monetary shock still causes a large downturn in economic
activity that is statistically significant at at least the 99% confidence
level. Thus, the apparent response of the real economy to monetary shocks
cannot be ascribed to possible correlations of monetary disturbances with
government spending 25
      A final additional factor that we consider is inflation.    It is
difficult to think of a plausible channel through which inflation by itself


                                      31
(independently of supply shocks) might directly depress real output.
Nevertheless, since inflation is obviously present during each of our
episodes, it may be useful to check whether allowing for a direct effect of
inflation on real activity alters our results. To do this, we include the
current and first 36 lags of the monthly percentage change in the producer
price index for finished goods in our basic regression. For industrial
production, including inflation has virtually rio   effect   on the shape,
amplitude, or statistical significance of the impulse response function for
a monetary shock. For unemployment, including inflation reduces the size of
the total real effect of the monetary shock somewhat, but the cumulative
impact after 33 months is still large and positive. In sum, in this case,
as in the other cases discussed, the result that monetary shocks matter
tremendously is robust to the inclusion of additional explanatory variables.


4. FRIEDMA} AD SCHWARTZ BEVI SITED

      A natural next step in our analysis is to return to the interwar
period to see what evidence the narrative approach sheds on the effects of
monetary shocks in this era. We do this with some trepidation, however,
because as we argue in Section 2, we believe that the identification of
monetary disturbances in the period before 1947 can never be as clear—cut or
 convincing as it is in the postwar era. Nevertheless, since Section 2
 suggests an alternative list of interwar shocks and Section 3 suggests an
 empirical test for the relationship between monetary shocks and real output,
 it seems useful to investigate how, if at all, employing a revised version
 of the narrative approach affects Friedman and Schwartz's conclusion that
 monetary disturbances had severe real effects in the interwar era.

       Specification. In Section 2 we discuss in detail Friedman and
 Schwartz's identification of monetary shocks in the interwar period. We
 argue that there may be some bias in their choices, and thus that the list
 of shocks that they focus on may not be the most appropriate one. For our
 basic iriterwar test we therefore consider a list of shocks somewhat
 different from Friedman and Schwartz's. In particular, we identify monetary
 shocks in five months in the interwar period: January 1920, October 1931,
 February 1933, January 1937, and September 1941. This list differs from
 that considered by Friedman and Schwartz by adding shocks in February 1933
 and September 1941 and by not including any shock in the first two years of



                                       32
the Great Depression.
     Our reasons for identifying shocks in 1933 and 1941 are described in
Section 2. We have two reasons for not including a shock in the early
stages of the Great Depression. First, our concern throughout the paper has
been with whether Federal Reserve policy actions have real effects. Since
whatever monetary disturbance may have occurred in the early part of the
Depression involved inaction rather than active changes in monetary policy,
it seems reasonable to exclude it. Second, because the interpretation of
monetary developments in the early stages of the Great Depression is so
controversial, we do not want our results to be driven by the identification
of a shock in this period. However, because the most appropriate selection
of shocks for the interwar period is not clear—cut, below we consider
alternatives to our basic list.
     Given our list of shocks, it is straightforward to implement the
statistical test of the real effects of monetary disturbances that we use in
the previous section. As before, we define a monetary shock dummy variable
that is equal to one in each of the months in which we identify a shock.
The data on real output that we use are the standard Federal Reserve Board
monthly index of total industrial production, which begins in 1919.26 The
equation that we estimate is identical to that given in equation (1) above.
The estimation period is 1921—44.

     Results. The coefficient estimates of this regression are given in
Table 3. Figure 6 shows the corresponding impulse response function,
together with the one standard error bands. The point estimates suggest a
very potent effect of monetary shocks on real economic activity. The
estimated maximum effect of a monetary shock on industrial production is a
fall of 20% after 18 months.
      While the real effect of a monetary shock in the interwar era appears
to be large, it is not estimated precisely. Over months 10 to 18, when the
effect is largest, the departure of the impulse response function from zero
is 1.5 to 2 times the associated standard error. This implies that the
hypothesis that the effect is zero is only marginally rejected at
conventional significance levels. Thus, while the interwar results are
entirely consistent with our finding for the postwar period that monetary
disturbances have large real effects, they do not by themselves provide
overwhelming evidence of those effects.




                                      33
     At the same time, the timing of the real effects of monetary shocks in
the basic interwar regression is quite different from the timing of real
effects in the postwar regressions. In both eras the effect over the first
six months is small. However, in the next twelve months the response is
much more abrupt and severe in the interwar era than in the postwar era.
The estimated impact of an interwar monetary shock plummets from essentially
zero five months after the shock to —17% after eleven months. Industrial
production then falls irregularly to its trough of —20% after eighteen
months. Then, again in sharp contrast to the results for the postwar
period, there is a strong rebound, with the effect rising from —20% to -3%
by month 23 and disappearing entirely by month 29.
      In short, our results suggest that the effects of demand disturbances
were both more rapid and less persistent in the interwar era than in the
postwar period. An obvious implication of this finding is that —-   in
contrast to the position taken by De Long and Summers (1988) and others -—
an explanation of the change in the overall persistence properties of real
output after World War II should be sought in changes in the mechanisms that
determine the economy's response to a given type of shock, rather than in
changes in the nature of the shocks themselves.

      Robustness. As with our postwar regressions, it is important to
investigate whether our results for the interwar era are being driven by the
omission of other potentially relevant variables. Because our list of
iriterwar monetary shocks includes one in the aftermath of World War I and
another shortly before the outbreak of World War II, the most obvious
omitted variable is some measure of fiscal policy.
      We attempt to account for the effects of fiscal policy in two ways.
Our first approach is to control directly for the effects of fiscal policy.
We do this by including in the regression the current and two lagged values
of the change since the previous year of the ratio of the federal budget
surplus to nominal GNP.27 Adding this variable has little effect on the
results. The coefficients on the fiscal policy variables are of the
expected sign (that is, a decrease in the surplus increases output), but
they are small and statistically insignificant. The impulse response
function for a monetary shock in this expanded regression is virtually
identical to that for the basic interwar regression.
      The second method that we use to deal with the possible effects of
fiscal policy is to exclude the two shocks associated with the World Wars



                                      34
and shorten the sample period to February 1922 - December 1940. These
changes greatly strengthen the estimated effect of monetary shocks. The
maximum depressing effect of a monetary shock is now a fall in industrial
production of 41%. The timing of the effects is essentially the same as for
the basic interwar regression.
     Finally, it is natural to contrast our results with those that would
be obtained using Friedman and Schwartz's list of shocks. To do this, we
define an alternative monetary shock dummy variable that is equal to one in
the five months in the interwar era when Friedman and Schwartz identify a
monetary shock: January 1920, October 1930, March 1931, October 1931, and
January 1937. The five shocks include the "three crucial experiments,' plus
two shocks early in the Great Depression corresponding to the beginnings of
the first two waves of banking failures.2' The specification is otherwise
the same as our basic one. The sample period is February 1921 - December
1944 and no deficit measure is included.
     The impulse response function for this regression is given in Figure 7
and shows, not surprisingly, that using Friedman and Schwartz's choices of
shocks rather than ours greatly increases the estimated effects of monetary
di5turbances. The maximum effect of a monetary shock on real output is now
a fall of 35% rather than 20% and is overwhelmingly, rather than marginally,
significant. The pattern of the responses is similar to that obtained usinç
our preferred list of shocks. The only noteworthy difference is that in
Figure 7 output recovers only two—thirds of its maximum loss after 36 months
rather than all.
     Overall, the results from the interwar regressions support the postwar
finding that monetary disturbances have very large effects on real economic
activity. They are thus also supportive of Friedman and Schwartz's belief
that money mattered tremendously in the interwar period. In fact, they may
actually strengthen Friedman and Schwartz's conclusion because they indicate
that the lagged effects of monetary shocks are shorter and sharper than
informal statistical procedures led Friedman and Schwartz to believe.2'


5. CONCLUSION

     This paper is based on two premises. The first is that the narrative
approach is the method that is most likely to be persuasive in resolving thE
question of whether monetary disturbances have real effects. The use of thE


                                      35
narrative approach allows a vast body of information that cannot be employed
in conventional statistical tests to be brought to bear on this question.
And it is this additional information that can solve the problem of
identifying the direction of causation between monetary factors and real
economic developments. The second premise is that employing the narrative
approach is difficult. Using it casually, as is typically done, can lead to
bias, either in the interpretation of the historical record or in the
inference that one draws about the real effects of monetary shocks.
      This paper is therefore an attempt to employ the narrative approach
carefully and systematically to study the real effects of monetary
disturbances. The first and last parts of the paper focus on the interwar
era, and are thus largely a reexamination of Friedman and Schwartz's
pathbreaking work. The middle and more important part considers evidence
for the period after World War II. From these two types of analysis we
reach five conclusions.
      First, in the postwar era there have been a series of episodes in
which the Federal Reserve has in effect deliberately attempted to induce a
recession to decrease inflation. These episodes are virtually ideal for
employing the narrative approach because monetary shocks can be identified
using a narrow and concrete set of criteria that are consistent across
episodes. Economic developments following these shifts in Federal Reserve
policy provide decisive evidence of the importance of monetary policy. In
every case, output fell substantially below what one would otherwise have
 expected. A shift to anti—inflationary monetary policy led, on average, to
 an ultimate reduction in industrial production of 12% and an ultimate rise
 in the unemployment rate of two percentage points. These effects are highly
 statistically significant.
       Second, in the postwar era the maximum depressing effect of anti-
 inflationary shifts in monetary policy occurs after roughly two and one half
 years, and there appears to be only a limited tendency for real activity to
 then return toward its pre—shock path. In other words, the real effects of
 demand disturbances appear to be highly persistent.
      Third, our extremely narrowly defined monetary disturbances account
 for a considerable fraction of fluctuations in postwar economic activity:
 our dummy variable for negative shifts in policy accounts for more than a
 fifth of the variation in detrended, deseasonalized unemployment in the
 postwar period. Because we find that demand disturbances have real effects


                                      36
and because our simple measure of monetary shocks almost surely captures
only a small fraction of demand fluctuations, our results strongly suggest
that demand disturbances are a primary source of postwar economic
fluctuations.
     Fourth, the narrative approach is extremely difficult to implement in
the interwar period. There is so much variation in monetary institutions
and doctrines and in economic events that it is almost impossible to study
the historical record of the period systematically. When the set of
monetary disturbances for the interwar period that, in our judgment, comes
as close as possible to being free of bias is considered, the interwar
evidence is also supportive of the view that monetary policy has large real
effects. The estimated maximum effect of a monetary disturbance for this
period is a reduction in industrial production of 20%.
     Fifth and last, the real effects of monetary shocks in the period
between World War I and World War II do not appear to be long—lasting. Our
estimates imply that by 33 months after a shock, output has essentially
returned to the path it would have followed in the absence of the shock.
Thus our results imply that demand disturbances have large real effects in
both the interwar and postwar eras, but that the persistence properties of
those real effects are very different in the two periods.




                                     37
RETERZNCES

Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
      Propagation of the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73:
     257—76.

Blarichard, Olivier Jean and Danny Quah. 1988. "The Dynamic Effects of
      Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances." NBER Working Paper No.
     2737.

Bordo, Michael D. 1988. "The Contribution of A Monetary History of The
     United States: 1867 to 1960 to Monetary History." NBER Working Paper
     No. 2549.

Brown, E. Cary. 1956. "Fiscal Policy in the 'Thirties: A Reappraisal."
      American Economic Review 46: 857—79.

Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1987. "Are Output Fluctuations
      Transitory?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 102: 857—80.

Chandler, Lester V. 1970. America's Greatest Depression, 1929—1941. New
      York: Harper and Row.
Cochrane, John H. 1988. "How Big Is the Random Walk in GNP?" Journal of
      Political Economy 96: 893—920.

De Long, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. "How Does
     Macroeconomic Policy Affect Output?" Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity, 433—80.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. l963a. A Monetary History of
     the United States, 1867—1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

__________ and __________ .   l963b.   "Money and Business Cycles." Review of
      Economics and Statistics 45: 32—64.

Gordon, Robert Aaron. 1974. Economic Instability and Growth: The American
     Record. New York: Harper & Row.
Gordon, Robert J. and James A. Wilcox. 1981. "Monetarist Interpretations
      of the Great Depression: An Evaluation and Critique." In The Great
      Depression Revisited, ed. Karl Brunner, 49—107. Hingham, Mass.:
     Martinus Nijhoff Publishing.
Hamilton, James D. 1987. "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression."
      Journal of Monetary Economics 19: 145—69.

Hendry, David F. and Neil R. Ericsson. 1987. "Assertion without Empirical
      Basis: An Econometric Appraisal of Monetary Trends ... in the United
      Kingdom by Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz." Oxford University
      Applied Economics Discussion Paper No. 25.

Kareken, John and Robert M. Solow. 1963. "Lags in Monetary Policy." In
      Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization Policies, 14—96.



                                       38
Kendrick, John W. 1961. Productivity Trends in the United States.
     Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1986. The World in Depression, 1929-1939.
     Revised edition. Berkeley: University of California Press.

King, Robert G. and Charles I. Plosser. 1984. "Money, Credit, and Prices
      in a Real Business Cycle." American Economic Review 74: 363—80.

Maddison, Angus. 1982. Phases of Capitalist Development. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.

Nelson, Charles R., and Charles I. Plosser. 1982. "Trends and Random Walks
      in Macroeconomic Time Series." Journal of Monetary Economics 10: 139-
      62.

Poterba, James M., Julio J. Rotemberg, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1986. "A
      Tax-Based Test for Nominal Rigidities." American Economic Review 76:
      659—75.

Romer, Christina D.  1988a. "World War I and the Postwar Depression: A
      Reinterpretation Based on Alternative Estimates of GNP." Journal of
      Monetary Economics 22: 91-115.

___________   1988b. "The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great
      Depression." NBER Working Paper No. 2639.

Schwartz, Anna J.   1981. "Understanding 1929—1933." In The Great
      Depression Revisited, ed. Karl Brunner, 5-48. Hinghain, Mass.:
      Martinus Nijhoff Publishing.
Summers, Lawrence. 1987. "What is Memorable in Empirical Macroeconomics?"
     Harvard University, unpublished manuscript.

Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New
     York: W. W. Norton & Company.

__________      1988.   "The Cause of the Great Depression." MIT, unpublished
      manuscript.

Tobin, James. 1965. "The Monetary Interpretation of History: A Review
     Article." American Economic Review 55: 464-85.

United States Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Annual
     Report. Various years.

___________     Federal Reserve Bulletin. Various years.
___________     Industrial   Production. 1986 Edition.

___________     Minutes of Federal Open Market Committee. Various years.
United States Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1986. National Income and
      Product Accounts, 1929-1982. U.S. Government Printing Office.



                                         39
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1988. Labor Force
      Statistics Derived from the Current Population Survey, 1948—87.
      U.S. Government Printing Office.
               Monthly Labor Review. Various issues.

United States Bureau of the Census. 1949. Historical Statistics of the
      United States, 17891945. Washington, D.C. : U.S. Government Printing
     Office.

United States Department of the Treasury. 1980. Annual Report of the
      Secretary of the Treasury, 1978—79. U.S. Government Printing Office.




                                       40
NOTES


1. Summers (1987) provides a cogent discussion of the persuasiveness of
narrative studies.

2. Many other authors have explored various aspects of Friedman and
Schwartz's work. To cite only a few of the most prominent examples,
Temin (1976), Gordon and Wilcox (1981), and Hamilton (1987) study
Friedman and Schwartz's analysis of the Great Depression, and Bordo
(1988) assesses their contributions to monetary history more generally.
Hendry and Ericsson (1987) criticize Friedman and Schwartz's econometric
methods, focusing mainly on their later work.

3. We also exclude the episodes that Friedman and Schwartz cite as
providing evidence of the effects of monetary disturbances on nominal
income, notably the secular deflation of 1879-1897 and the secular
inflation of 1897—1914. In the early 1960s, when Friedman and Schwartz
wrote, there was widespread agreement that shifts in aggregate demand had
important real effects but not that changes in money had important
effects on aggregate demand. Thus to Friedman and Schwartz, evidence
that monetary disturbances affected either output or prices was evidence
that "money mattered." Today, of course, the central motive for interest
in the effects of monetary disturbances is the desire to gain insight
into the question of whether aggregate demand shocks have real effects.

4.  It can be argued that this negative shock was followed by a positive
shock from Roosevelt's gold policies. While changes in competitiveness
arising from the rise in the dollar price of gold in 1933 could certainly
have stimulated the economy through increased net exports, Chandler
stresses that Roosevelt's gold policies "did not begin to make additions
to the monetary base or bank reserves until after the adoption of the
Gold Reserve Act at the end of January 1934" (1970, p. 164) . Thus, any
monetary component to this positive shock did not occur until nearly a
year after the negative monetary shock of early 1933. Furthermore, if
one follows the logic of Friedman and Schwartz, there may be no monetary
shock at all in 1934 because an expansion of high powered money is the
usual and expected reaction to severe depression.

5. A final episode that is not identified in the Monetary History as a
major shock, but that could be considered a change in monetary policy, is
the contractionary open market operations and increases in the discount rate
that began in January 1928 (see, for example, Hamilton, 1987; Schwartz,
1981; and Temin, 1988) . While we agree that money became tighter in this
period, it is not clear whether this tightening should be viewed as unusual
or simply as a usual reaction to real economic events such as the boom in
real output and stock prices. Furthermore, we also agree with Friedman and
Schwartz that the tightening in 1928 was fairly small, especially when
considered relative to the contractionary shocks in 1920, 1931, and 1937.
As they note, the Federal Reserve "followed a policy which was too easy to
break the speculative boom, yet too tight to promote healthy economic
growth" (1963, p. 291) . (Gordon and Wilcox, 1981, and Hamilton, 1987, also
provide evidence that the monetary shock in 1928-1929 was small relative to
the subsequent decline in real output.) Hence, unless one uses a procedure
that calibrates shocks according to severity, it is prudent to not identify
the 1928 tightening as a monetary shock.

                                     41
6. Throughout the paper, percentage changes refer to differences in
logarithms.
7. For 1918-21, the GNP data are from Romer (1988a, Table 5) and the
government purchases data are from Keridrick (1961, Table A—ha) . The data
for 1944—47 are from the National Income and Product Accounts.

8. As an accounting matter, the swing from rapid growth of the money stock
from 1934 to 1937 to a decline in 1937—38 was primarily the result of a
sharp decline in the growth rate of high-powered money. This in turn
appears to have stemmed largely from a switch by the Treasury to sterilizing
gold inflows in the first three quarters of 1937. Friedman and Schwartz do
not discuss the reasons for this change in Treasury policy. (1963a, pp.
509—511.)
9. See for example the FOMC meetings of Jan 11, June 22, and July 12, 1955
(1955 Annual Report, pp. 90, 98, 100)

10. See for example the Record of Policy Actions for the FOMC meetings of
Jan. 10, Feb. 15, March 6, and April 17, 1956.

11. On the basis of the Record of Policy Actions one could argue for a
similar interpretation of the shift to tighter policy in October of 1947.
The record for the FOMC meeting of October 6-7 states: "In the period since
the previous meeting of the Committee conditions affecting the money market
had changed considerably. Inflationary pressures had increased and there
were indications that they would continue to be strong in the months
immediately ahead" (1947 Annual Report, p. 95) . The interpretation that the
Federal Reserve was attempting to do more than offset shocks to aggregate
demand appears more compelling, however, for two reasons. First, it is very
plausible that the minutes could be much franker than the Record of Policy
Actions concerning any desire to cause a recession. Second, inspection of
the reasons that the Federal Reserve gave in support of the view that
inflationary pressures were increasing strongly suggests that what they
meant was simply that in the absence of tighter policy, inflation and high
output would continue. For example:
      "Inflationary pressures have been strong in our economy during
      the past few months, and there is ample indication that these
      pressures will continue strong, and perhaps be accentuated, in
      the months immediately ahead. The basic causes of this situation
      are well known. A vast supply of money and other liquid assets
      was created during the war and there have been additions to this
      accumulation of purchasing power since the end of the war. There
      has also been an inadequate supply of goods and services
      growing out of the destruction of war and the deferment of
      civilian demands when a large part of output was destined for
      military use ... . The existing situation, therefore, spells
      continuing pressure toward higher prices. In addition we must
      take cognizance of the fact that conditions are highly favorable
      to further credit expansion     ."   (From a letter from the FOMC
      to the Secretary of the Treasury; Minutes 1947, pp. 1834)

 Aside from the phrase "and perhaps be accentuated," what was being argued
 was simply that, in the absence of tighter policy, prices, credit, and money
 would continue to increase.

                                      42
12. The quotations are from the Records of Policy Actions of the FOMC
meetings of Dec. 17, 1968, Jan. 14, 1969, and March 4, 1969 —- 1968 Annual
Report, p. 224, and 1969 Annual Report, pp. 109, 117.

13. One can plausibly argue that the 'shock could be dated a month or two
later than December 1968. The tightening that occurred in December was in
part a response to evidence of stronger growth. By early 1969, however, it
was clear that the change in policy involved more. We choose December 1968
because the Federal Reserve cites this as the time when "the Federal Reserve
System embarked on a policy of increased monetary restraint" (1969 Annual
Report, p. 75). Dating the shock in March 1969 has no important effects on
our results.

14. See especially 1974 Annual Report, pp. 165, 173, 180—1.

15. 1974 Annual Report, pp. 109, 108, and 108, respectively. The
statements occur in explanations of decisions by the Board of Governors to
deny proposed increases in the discount rate. Nonetheless, they are meant
to describe the basic stance of policy.

16. Using the federal funds rate for the five episodes that have occurred
since the development of the federal funds market does not alter these
results. The growth rate of the monetary base also generally slows around
the times of the shocks, though its movements across episodes are less
consistent than those of the commercial paper rate. The reason for this
greater variability is very likely simply that in all of the episodes
 (including the 1979 one) the Federal Reserve focused to. a considerable
extent on interest rate movements, while in many of the episodes it was
relatively unconcerned with the monetary base.

17. The industrial production series is from Industrial Production, 1986
Edition, Table A-li. The unemployment series is from Labor Force Statistics
Derived from the Current Population Survey, 1948—87, Table A-3l. The
unemployment series for 1946 and 1947 is taken from various issues of the
Monthly Labor Review. The data for 1946 and 1947 are based on the same
household survey as later estimates, but have not been revised to take into
account modern changes in the definition of the labor force. To prevent a
spurious jump in the series in January 1948, we splice the old and new
series together in this month.

18. As in Figure 2, Figure 4 shows the cumulative sum of the impulse
responses so that the effect of the shock on the log level of industrial
production can be seen more easily.

19. The standard errors are calculated using the formula for the asymptotic
standard error of a non—linear function of the regression parameters. See
Poterba, Rotemberg, and Summers (1986, p. 668) for details.

20. Even though it does not represent a monetary shock by our criteria, the
"credit crunch" of 1965-66 is often characterized as an important episode of
tight monetary policy. We have therefore investigated the effects of adding
a shock in December 1965. We find the results are essentially unchanged by
this addition.



                                      43
21. A related point concerns our method for identifying shocks. To
identify a change in monetary policy we often use Federal Reserve records
for up to six months after the apparent change. We do this because shifts
in policy are often not sufficiently sudden or dramatic that they can be
identified from, for example, the records of a single meeting. This
introduces a slight possibility of bias: if the System has a tendency to
state that it was attempting to create a downturn only if evidence that
there will be a downturn has appeared, our test will overstate the effects
of shifts in policy. To ensure that this possible bias is not affecting our
results, we look at the forecast errors of the simple univariate forecasts
starting six months after each shock. Even with these six extra months of
actual data, however, the declines in output that occur following the
monetary shocks cannot be predicted.

22. The relative price of food and energy is measured as the ratio of a
weighted average of the producer price indexes for crude foodstuffs and
feedstuffs, crude fuel, and crude petroleum to the producer price index for
finished products.

23. The same results obtain when alternative measures of supply shocks are
used. Among the variants we have tried are the percentage change in the
relative price of crude petroleum and the percentage change in the relative
price of all crude materials for further processing.

24. The budget surplus data are from the National Income and Product
Accounts and cover both the federal government and state and local
governments. Quarterly observations were included by assuming that the
deficit to GNP ratio was constant over a quarter, and then measuring the
change in the ratio between the current month and 3 months ago, between 3
and six months ago, and so on.

25. Using the ratio of the cyclically-adjusted federal budget surplus to
nominal GNP rather than the fiscal policy measure employed in the text has
essentially no effect on the results. Specifically, we employ the Bureau of
Economic Analysis measure of the cyclically—adjusted surplus (from
CITIBASE), which is available beginning in 1955. Adding the current and
first twelve lags of the quarterly change in the ratio of this measure to
nominal GNP to our basic regression estimated over the period 1958—1987 has
virtually no impact on the estimated impact of the monetary shock dummy.

26. We use the most recent version of this series (given in Industrial
Production, 1986) and again use seasonally unadjusted data. While the FPB
index is the best and most comprehensive monthly index of production
available for the interwar period, it is not without problems. Most
importantly, there is a break in the series in 1923. For the period after
1923, the FRB revised its original index to have broader coverage by
including data on manhours for those industries where direct measures of
physical production were unavailable. This revision was not carried back to
the period 1919—1923 because the necessary data were unavailable. This
difference in procedures is potentially important because the inclusion of
the manhours data tends to reduce the volatility of the EBB index after
1923. This means that some of the relatively dramatic movements in the
index for 1919-1923 would probably disappear if the earlier series were
constructed using the same methods as the later index.
      Because we want to include the 1920 monetary shock, starting the
estimation in 1923 and thus using only the unbroken series is not possible.

                                     44
However, to test whether the inconsistency in the data affects our empirical
results, we do the following. Since the revision of the Fed series to
include manhour data was not done until 1940, there exists a consistently
bad FRB index for 1919 to 1940. We can use this consistent series in the
regressions and see if it yields results that are noticeably different from
those based on the inconsistent series. We find that the results are very
similar for both the consistent and inconsistent data. We therefore opt for
the inconsistent data because they exist after 1940 and thus allow us to
examine the real effects of the rise in reserve requirements in late 1941.

27. The budget variable used is the nominal administrative budget surplus
or deficit given in the statistical appendix of the Annual Report of the
Secretary of the Treasury, 1980, Table 2. The nominal GNP numbers are from
Ronier, 1988a, Table 5, and the National Income and Product Accounts of the
U.S, Table 1. Both the budget and the GNP data are only available annually.
Monthly figures are set equal to the annual value and changes are calculated
in multiples of 12.
28. It is difficult to date precisely the monetary shock (or shocks) that
Friedman and Schwartz associate with the early stages of the Great
Depression. We choose October 1930 and March 1931 because it is in reference
to the banking crises that Friedman and Schwartz are most emphatic in
arguing that monetary policy was highly unusual. Including only the "three
crucial experiments" rather than all five shocks has little effect on the
results.

29. An obvious implication of the conclusion that monetary policy had large
real effects in the interwar period is that the Great Depression would have
been less severe if monetary policy had been less contractionary. In that
sense, our results are supportive of Friedman and Schwartz's interpretation
of the Depression. But since, as described above, neither we nor Friedman
and Schwartz detect an active monetary shock at the onset of the Depression,
and since there is strong evidence of non—monetary shocks, the severe
initial downturn was most likely largely the result of non-monetary forces.
Furthermore, because our results do not provide an estimate of the size of
the effect of a given monetary change, we cannot determine how much less
severe the subsequent depression might have been under any particular
alternative policy.




                                     45
                                             Table I
                               Basic Industrial Production Regression

Sample Period: Feb. 1948 - Dec. 1987
Dependent Variable: Percentage Change in Industrial Production


  Dummy for Shift in Monetary Policy                     Lagged Changes in Industrial Production

             Coefficient    Standard Error              Lag        Coefficient     Standard Error
Lag
  0             -.0041          .0062
   1              .0081         .0062                      1             .2218         .0492
  2               .0014         .0062                     2              .0773         .0503
  3               .0020         .0062                     3             -.0294         .0503
  4             -.0004          .0057                     4               .0566        .0498
   5            -.0061           .0057                     5            -.0512         .0496
   6            -.0025           .0057                     6            -.0937         .0496
   7            -.0071           .0057                     7              .0504        .0496
   8            -.0166           .0057                     8            -.0383         .0491
   9              .0030          .0057                     9            -.0485          .0491
  10             -.0067          .0057                    10            -.0296          .0489
  11               .0020         .0057                    11              .0114         .0485
  12               .0032         .0057                    12              .1497         .0483
  13             -.0055          .0057                    13             -.1242         .0483
  14             -.0001          .0058                    14             -.1409         .0487
  15             -.0035          .0058                    15             -.0810         .0491
  16             -.0056          .0058                    16             -.0714         .0493
  17             -.0025          .0058                    17               .1009        .0494
  18             -.0105          .0058                    18             -.0452         .0494
  19             -.0073          .0058                    19             -.0085         .0482
  20             -.0116           .0058                   20             -.0568          .0473
  21               .0021          .0058                   21            -.0911           .0467
  22               .0009          .0058                   22              .0222          .0470
  23              -.0081          .0058                   23             -.0607          .0451
  24              -.0100          .0058                   24              .1175          .0434
  25                .0009         .0058
  26              -.0081          .0058
  27              -.0021          .0058
  28              -.0059          .0058
  29              -.0078           .0058
  30              -.0006           .0058
  31               -.0055          .0058
  32               -.0010          .0058
  33                .0123          .0057
  34              .0079            .0057
  35              -.0024           .0057
  36              -.0034           .0057


 R2 = .825
 S.E.E. = .0132
 Q(63) = 53.75
 Coefficients and standard errors for the constant term and monthly dummies are not reported.
                                                Table 2
                                      Basic Unemployment Regression
Sample Period: Jan. 1948 - Dcc. 1987
Dependent Variable: Unemployment Rate


 Dummy for Shift in Monetary Policy                                   Lagged Unemployment Rates

Lag          Coefficient    Standard Error                      Lag        Coefficient   Standard En-or
     0            -.0979         .1272
     1            -.1049         .1272                           1            1.0539         .0496
     2            .0460          .1274                           2             .1091         .0718
     3            .0692          .1167                           3            -.1685         .0720
     4            .0799          .1166                           4             .0313         .0724
     5            -.0004         .1164                           5            -.0140         .0722
     6             .1369         .1161                           6            -.0659         .0714
     7             .0266         .1163                           7            -.0371         .0713
     8             .0784         .1160                           8             .0844         .0712
     9             .2989         .1157                           9            -.0360         .0704
 10               -.0709             .1162                      10            -.0389         .0704
 11               -.1461             .1162                      11             .0881         .0707
 12               -.0692             .1165                      12             .1659         .0693
 13               -.0326             .1162                      13            -.2807         .0690
 14                .1691             .1179                      14            -.0191         .0705
 15                .1168             .1181                      15             .0113         .0708
 16                .0533             .1182                      16             .0521         .0704
 17                .0162             .1179                      17             .0529         .0702
 18                .0712             .1176                      18            -.0967         .0706
 19                .1652             .1175                      19             .1399         .0707
 20                .1053             .1177                      20            -.0852         .0711
 21                .2589             .1178                      21             .0100         .0708
 22               -.0212             .1183                      22             .0741         .0702
 23                .0320             .1170                      23            -.1261         .0702
 24                .2330             .1170                      24             .0668         .0487
 25               -.1101             .1172
 26               .3029              .1173
 27               .2415              .1181
 28               .1263              .1190
 29               .1379              .1190
 30               .0645              .1184
 31               -.0008             .1182
 32               -.0712             .1181
 33               .1046              .1169
 34               -.0071             .1169
 35               -.0202             .1168
 36               -.0824             .1168



R2   = .981
S.E.E.   = .267
Q(63) = 56.25

Coefficients and standard   errors    for    the   constant term, the trend, and monthly dummies     are   not
reported.
                                               Table 3
                            Basic Interwar Industrial Production Regression

Sample Period: Feb. 1921 - Dec. 1944
Dependent Variable: Percentage Change in Industrial Production


 Dummy for Change in Monetary Policy                       Lagged Changes in Industrial Production

                              Standard Error              Lag        Coefficient     Standard Error
Lag          Coefficient

  0              -.0294            .0150
                                   .0150                     1           .5776           .0680
   1             -.0017
                  .0254            .0150                     2          -.0850           .0778
   2                                                                                      .0775
                                                             3          -.1196
   3              .0018            .0151
                                                                         .0110            .0780
   4              .0048            .0151                     4
                                   .0150                     5           .1157            .0772
   5             -.0066
                                   .0150                     6           -.1729           .0769
   6             -.0306
                                   .0151                     7           .1340            .0779
   7             -.0183
                                   .0151                     8           .0247            .0778
   8             -.0186
                                   .0151                     9           .0262            .0765
   9             -.0209
                                   .0151                    10           .0009            .0750
  10             -.0010
  ii              .0082            .0151                    11           .0481
                                                                         .1407
                                                                                          .0738
                                                                                          .0732
  12             -.0114            .0151                    12
                                   .0137                    13           -.1474           .0693
  13              .0050
                                   .0136                    14           -.0789           .0691
  14             -.0010
                                   .0135                    15            .0734           .0689
  15              .0046
                                   .0139                    16           -.0281           .0695
  16               .0008
                                   .0139                    17            .0333            .0695
  17             -.0205
                                   .0139                    18           -.0282            .0686
  18               .0434
  19               .0248           .0142                    19           -.0500           .0681
  20               .0149           .0143                    20            .0406           .0661
                                   .0141                    21           -.0641           .0658
  21               .0213
                                   .0142                    22           -.0114           .0645
  22               .0156
                                                            23           -.0381           .0642
  23              -.0125           .0142
  24               .0118           .0143                    24            .0645            .0584
  25              -.0033            .0143
  26               .0171            .0142
  27              -.0264            .0142
   28              .0226            .0144
   29              .0078            .0142
   30             -.0148            .0142
   31             -.0207            .0141
   32               .0349           .0142
   33               .0029           .0143
   34              .0133            .0141
   35             -.0296            .0140
   36             -.0163            .0142



 R2 = .652
 S.E.E. = .0270
 Q(48) = 18.08

  Coefficient   and standard errors for the constant term and monthly dummies are not reported.
                                       Figure 1

                     Economic Activity and Monetary Shocks


Index of Industrial Production (in logarithms)

           5.8




                    1958   1955 1968    1965      1970 1975   1998 1985



Unemployment Rate

          11.8



           8.5



           6.0



           3.5



            1.8
                    1958 1955 1968       1965 1978 1975 1988        1985

Notes: Vertical lines are drawn at the dates of monetary shocks. The actual
dates are Oct. 1947, Sept. 1955, Dec. 1968, Apr. 1974, Aug. 1978, and Oct. 1979.
The source of the data is described in the text. The data have been seasonally
adjusted by a regression on seasonal dummy variables.
                                    Figure 2

       Cumulative Forecast Errors of Univariate Autoregressive Model
            for Industrial Production Following Monetary Shocks




October 197
                 I..'


                  L13

                 -1.12


                 -LI?
                                                        I
                 -112

                 —Li?

                 —   ,,
                          1948            1949          1958




September 1955




 December 1968




                             1969          1971       1971
                                Figure 2 (continued)




AprH 197+




                         1974             1975   -          19Th




                 8.88

                 8.83
 August 1978
                 -882

                 -8.87


                 -Lu

                 —LI?

                 -a,,
                                   1979              1988          1981




  October 1979
                                     Figure 3

                 Forecast Errors of Univariate Autoregressive Model
                 for the Unemployment Rate Following Monetary Shocks




October l947




September 1955




                     2. B


 December 1968
                     1.8




                     LB


                    —1.2



                    —1.2
                             1969         1978         1971
                         Figure 3   (continued)




                 2.8

AprH 1974
                 1.8



                 S.8



                —$.2



                —1.2




                  2.8

August 1978
                  1.8


                  S. 8



                 —8.2



                 _4 ,
                                                   1981




 October 1979




                          199S           1981     1982
                                Figure Li

                     Impulse Response Function for
                Basic Industrial Production Regression




       8.85


       8.88


      —8.95



      —8.18



      —8.15



      —8.28

                             tIONTHS AFTER SHOCI




Notes: The impulse response function shows the impact of a unit shock to
the monetary dumy variable. The impulse responses for the change in
industrial production have been cumulated so that they reflect the movement
in levels.

      The coefficient estimates used to generate the impulse response
function are given in Table 1.

      The dashed lines show the one standard error confidence bands.
                                 Figure 5

                      Impulse Response Function for
                      Basic Unemployment Regression




           3.8

           2.5

       P   2.8
       E
       R   1.5
       C
       E   1.8
       N
       T
           8.5

           8.8

           —8.5

                               IIONTHS AFFER SHOCX




Notes: The impulse response function shows the impact of a unit shock to the
monetary dummy variable

      The coefficient estimates used to generate the impulse response functior
are given in Table 2.

     The dashed lines show the one standard error confidence bands.
                                       Figure 6

                            Impulse Response Function for
                   Basic Interwar Industrial Production Regression




         8.3




             8.1

             ao
             u.u


         —0. 1



         —8.2


         —8.3


         —0.4

                                     IIOHTHS AFTER SHOCX




Notes: The impulse response function shows the impact of a unit shock to
the monetary dumy variable. The impulse responses for the change in
industrial production have been cumulated so that they reflect the movement
in levels.

      The coefficient estimates used to generate the impulse response
function are given in Table 3.

      The dashed lines show the one standard error confidence bands.
                                   Figure 7

                         Impulse Response Function for
                   Interwar Industrial Production Regression
                      Using Friedman and Schwartz's Shocks




             8.1

       /     8.8



           —a. i


           —0.2


           —8.3


           —8.4


           —8.5


                                  MONTHS AFTER SHOCX




Notes: The impulse response function shows the impact of a unit shock to
iTimonetary dummy variable. The impulse responses for the change in
industrial production have been cumulated so that they reflect the movement
in levels.

      The dashed lines show the one standard error confidence bands.
