                                         NBER Working Paper #3278
                                         March 1990


           CHANGING EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY ON REAL ECONOMIC ACTIVITY


                                     ABSTRACT

     Major changes have taken place in the U.S. economy within the past quarter
century.  Changes with implications that are at least potentially important for
the effect of monetary policy on real economic activity include the elimination
of Regulation Q interest ceilings and the development of the secondary mortgage
market, the greater openness of the U.S. economy including both goods markets
and financial markets, and the rapidly increasing indebtedness of private
borrowers including especially nonfinancial business corporations.

     Examination of relationships between monetary policy and economic activity
at a detailed, dis aggregated level indicates several changes within the past
quarter century that are broadly consistent with these changes in the
underlying economic environment:   First, the elimination of major episodes of
credit rationing in the mortgage market has clearly rendered housing less
sensitive to restrictive monetary policy; moreover, there is no solid evidence
of change in the sensitivity of homebuilding to mortgage interest rates.
Second, business fixed investment has become more sensitive to financial market
conditions, at least in the short run.   Third, consumer spending has become
less sensitive to interest rate increases and stock price declines, at least in
situations that persist for lengthy periods of time.   Fourth, although foreign
trade has clearly grown relative to aggregate U.S. economic activity, both
exports and imports exhibit less sensitivity to exchange rate changes, and
hence presumably less sensitivity to monetary policy actions, than in earlier
years.




                                         Benjamin M. Friedman
                                         Department of Economics
                                         Harvard University
                                         Littauer Center 127
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
