                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DETERMINANTS OF SAVING AND LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION OF THE ELDERLY IN JAPAN




                                Tetsuj i Yamada
                                Tadashi Yamada
                                  Guorn Liu




                            Working Paper No. 3292




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #3292
                                        March 1990


 DETERMINANTS OF SAVING AND LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION OF THE ELDERLY IN JAPAN


                                   ABSTRACT




     Japanese annual time series data covering the period 1951 to 1982 reveals
that changes in the program of social security retirement benefits have
substantial influence on personal saving and retirement behavior. The
empirical results show that social security retirement benefits depress
personal saving by approximately 13.5 thousand yen per capita in real terms
from 1951 to 1982. However, declining labor force participation of the elderly
(i.e., earlier retirement), stimulates personal saving by an estimated .5
thousand yen over the same period. The study finds that the benefit effect
dominates the retirement effect. The net effect is consequently a downward
impact on personal saving. The parameter estimates indicate that the
retirement behavior induced by social security retirement benefits tends to
become more sensitive and responsive to a rise in the benefits. In addition
this study has identified a negative interdependency between the personal
saving and labor retirement behaviors; that is, an individual saves more before
retirement if he expects to stay a shorter time in the labor market, and vice
versa. Moreover, personal saving influenced by retirement behavior tends to
become less and less responsive, though the results indicate a relatively large
response, and although very small, the retirement behavior gradually becomes
more responsive to change in personal saving.




Tetsuji Yamada             Tadashi Yamada                Cuorn Liu
Dept. of Economics         College of International      Dept. of Economics
Rutgers University           Relations                   The Graduate Center
State University of NJ     University of Tsukuba         City University of NY
and NBER                   Tennodai 1-1-1                33 West 42nd Street
269 Mercer Street           Tsukuba- Shi, Obaralo -ken   New York, NY 10036
8th Floor                  Japan 305
New York, NY 10003         and NBER
                               I, Introduction

     In the debate over high Japanese personal saving, the Japanese saving and
consumption behavior have come under fire. In spite of conceptal differences
in saving between Japan and the United States and other nations personal saving
rates in Japan remain higher than that of the United States. The ratio of per-
sonal saving to disposable income has been markedly high since World War II. It
was sometimes over twenty percent and is currently about sixteen or seventeen
percent. Although a relatively large public debt-to-GOP ratio (26 percent)
exists, the excess saving over investment in Japan creates a huge pool of savings
which flow out to foreign nations. Researchers have focussed increasing atten-
tion on the high Japanese saving rate. Despite the number of recent studies,
there is still no consensus among researchers, nor a full understanding of
Japanese saving behavior. This paper sheds light on Japanese personal saving
from the different aspects related to social security retirement benefits and
to elderly labor force behavior.

     The previous studies on saving have attempted to explain various aspects
of Japanese saving behavior. In the National Survey of Family Income and
Expenditure (micro data in 1974 and 1979), Ando, Yamashita, and Murayama
(1986) remark that one of the reasons for a high saving rate stems from a high
growth rate. In the macroeconomic framework, Hayashi (1986) concludes that
the growth rate does not explain the high saving rate in Japan. Dekle (1986),
Hayashi (1986), and Hayashi, Ito and Slemrod (1981) emphasize a bequest motive
of saving in a life-cycle model. Ishikawa and Ueda (1984) find bonus payments
exert positive effects on personal saving and simulated results show three per-
centage points of contribution to the saving on average. However, the bonus
hypothesis does not provide a dominant explanation of Japanese saving. Sato
(1987) uses a theoretically sound target wealth hypothesis in an attempt to
explain Japanese personal saving behavior when it is not adequately explained
by the permanent income hypotesis and the life-cycle hypothesis. His empiri-
cal arguments CCSP/BOJ Survey mainly focus on inflation, demand for labor and
demand for housing as exogenous variables. These exogeous variables give
theoretically robust results. However, the major shortcoming in Sato (1987)
is that a treatment of welfare pension is ignored, although evidence of
welfare pension effects on personal saving are inconclusive in Japan.

     Despite many theoretical and empirical U.. studies on the effect of
social security retirement benefits on saving, there are few on this issue
for Japan. By analyzing a substitution between expected retirement payment
and preretirement wealth accumulations, and using time series data (from the
Family Saving Survey, and the Family Income and Expenditure Survey,
1968-1980), Noguchi (1983) does not draw decisive conclusions about the effect
of social security retirement benefits on wealth accumulation. Estimated
coefficients are not sensitive to the choice of age groups and are negative.
However, the coefficients do not provide statistically significant robust
results. Sasaki and Tachibanaki (1965) use the same data with a different
period (1966—1982) than Noguchi (1983) uses. Unlike Noguchi, Sasaki and
Tachibanaki conclude that the effect of social security retirement benefits on
household saving is significant with cohort classification. They report that
the substitutability between social security retirement benefits and household
saving increases as age cohort rises.
                                   -2-

     In the studies on Japanese saving, arguments overlook the importance of
an increase in aging population. Ando, Vamashita and Murayama (1986) suggest
that early retirement induces a high saving rate with a life—cycle hypothesis.
They, however, introduce the question whether prolonged retirement raises or
lowers the saving in Jaan and conclude that an increase in aging population
may lower the saving rate.   Seike (1982) examines the influence of social
security retirement benefits and household saving on elderly labor supply
using individual data in 1974 from Zenkoku Shohi Jittai Chosa (ZSJC) and
Chingin Kozo Kihon Chosa (CKKC). The ZSJC is household survey data and does
not provide labor supply information. The CKKC is labor supply data and does
not contain nonlabor income, i.e., social security retirement benefits data.
In spite of the restriction of data. Seike skillfully manipulates the data and
demonstrates the impact of social security retirement benefits on labor
supply. The impact is statistically significant, though noderately small.
The coefficients for the stock of saving variables are somewhat embarrassing
and positively significant. His theoretical explanation of income preference
by elderly labor supply behavior seems to be unsound. The micro data in Japan
provide little evidence of saving behavior in terms of a change in retirement
and an increase in aging population in Japan. Even though Horioka (1990) sur-
veys the literature and comprehensively discusses various factors which have
been suggested as possible causes of the high saving rate in Japan, further
studies are required to understand behavioral patterns concerning high per-
sonal saving in order to guide policy actions.

     Previous studies in Japan frequently neglected the relationship between
personal saving and retirement, and their behavioral simultaneity. Cross-
country tests by Modigliani and Sterling (1983) show robust evidence that
the labor force participation of the elderly and an insufficient welfare pen-
sion in Japan have a negative influence on the saving rate. Feldstein (1980)
treats the labor force participation rate of older men as endogeneous and
finds that an earlier retirement raises the saving rate in the 12 industrial
country sample. The determination of saving and retirement habits seems
to be endogeneous decisions. To demonstrate a simultaneity of personal saving
and retirement, this study employs personal saving and labor force par-
ticipation o the elderly as endogenous in the framework of an extended life
cycle model.

     The empirical work of this study, using Japanese time—series data, also
attempts to explain the impact of social security retirement benefits on per-
sonal saving and the labor force participation of the elderly in Japan. Such
a study is necessary for predicting behavior patterns concerning saving and
retirement, and for guiding policy actions. This study will attempt, as well,
to provide theoretical and empirical explanations of saving and retirement
behavior, and their behavioral interdependency. Horioka (1990) addresses an
advantage of a time-series data application. He explains traditional and
cultural influences on the high Japanese saving rate, and the difficulty of
empirical tests for traditional and cultural aspects. In this respect
Horioko implies that the time-series approach is better than a cross-sectional
one. Since tradition has presumably weakened over time, the saving rate
should show a long—term downward trend if the saving behavior is attributed to
tradition. Therefore, the empirical relationship between personal saving and
                                    —3—

labor force participation of the elderly, namely the proxy index of retire-
ment, deserve more careful attention and clarification in the context of
social security retirement benefits.

     This paper is organized as follows. Section II contains a brief review
of the social security program in Japan. Section Itt describes an analytical
framework and a theoretical argument of variables. The empirical results are
presented in Section IV.  In Section V the study concludes by mentioning the
potential importance of issues in relation to behavioral contexts of personal
saving and labor force participation of the elderly, and to social security
retirement benefits.
                                     —4


                II. A Brief Review of the Social Security Program

      Japan has dual and partially funded public welfare pension schemes. The
 Employe&s Pension Insurance Plan CEPI) covers a majority of Japanese workers.
 These workers are employees of firms in industry and commerce with five or
more employees. An employee in a non-corporate firm, even though it employs
 less than five employees, is still qualified for a voluntary coverage subject
to approval. At age 60, EPI provides a labor earning related benefit financed
by equal employer and employee payroll tax contributions. The EPI receives a
payment from the general budget for one—third the amount transferred from the
EPI to the NPI Cthe National Pension Insurance). A flat tax rate of 12.4% is
applied to monthly labor earnings up to a maximum 710 thousand yen, the mini-
mum being 68 thousand yen for male workers. The other is the National Pension
Insurance plan (NPI) which covers any economically active Japanese workers not
otherwise insured and self—employed. At age 55, NPI provides a universal flat
basic benefit financed by the self-employed, non-employed adults, students
 (age 20 years and over), and contributions from the EPI which also includes
contributions on behalf of nonemployed wives. NPI receives a subsidy from the
general revenues amounting to one-third of benefit costs less transfers from
EPI. The lump sum amount, 6,800 yen in 1986, is contributed monthly by the
self—employed, nonemployed adults and students. The contribution will be gra-
dually raised every year and employed persons and their spouses are exempted
from the contributions. Benefits under both EP! and NPI are automatically
adjusted for changes of 5% or more in consumer prices during a year or two
years and more. Both require 25 years of contributions.

     In addition to the two major public welfare pension schemes, a special
system (mutual aid associations) covers local and national government
employees, employees of agricultural and fishery cooperative associations, and
private school teachers. There is also a special program for seamen. As
shown in Table 1, both members and beneficiaries of EPI have constantly been
increasing compared to other plans.

     The receipts of the welfare pension tax (social security tax) are depo-
sited in special treasury accounts (Trust Fund Bureaus) and the fund is
managed by the Treasury Investment and Loans Division. As of 1985, the accu-
mulated pension fund was 27,983 billion yen. The EPI and NPI reserves serve
a public function. For the purpose of improving living conditions, the fund
is used for housing, living environment improvements, small enterprises,
culture, education, agriculture, forestry, fisheries, etc. The interest rates
were fixed by the government at rates below market. The rate is now based on
market rates after 1987 legislation. The proceeds of the interest payments
are used for part of the administrative costs of the social security program.

     The Employee's Pension Insurance plan was promulgated in 1941 and imple-
mented in 1942 while the National Pension Insurance plan was promulgated in
1959 and implemented in 1961. Both EPI and NP! are partially funded public
pension schemes. Since its inception, the EPI has evolved and implemented
these programs an introduction of minimum guarantee for survivors permanent
disability benefits, an introduction of eligibility for social security
retirement benefits while remaining on the job and an increase in benefits in
                                   —5


1965, an introduction of automatic price adjustment for benefits due to the
1973 oil crisis, and relaxations of qualifying conditions in 1976, 1978, 1979
and 1980. The benefits of EPI have increased markedly in 1965, 1973, 1974,
1975 and 1982. The NP! has also involved: an introduction of automatic price
adjustment for benefits in 1974. a special payment of pension insurance for
uninsured adult residents in 1978. a guarantee of minimum pension benefits for
survivors and orphans in 1979, and an abolition of requirement of nationality
in 1982. The benefits of NP! were greatly raised in 1974, 1975 and 1977 after
the oil crisis..

     The Japanese government made a major reform of the public welfare pension
scheme (shown in the Appendix) in 1985 and implemented it in April 1986. The
catalyst for this reform came from the inception and implementation of EPI in
1942 and of NPI in 1961. There are several reasons for the reform. While the
estimated number of persons 65 and over is currently at 10% of the population,
the government expects this number to rise to 17% by the beginning of the 21st
century. The ratio of elderly to working-age population will sharply increase
from 7 working persons for an elderly person who is 60 and over, to 3.5
working persons. Because of this concern, the future financial health of the
public welfare pension program is threatened by drastically rising costs in
the aging population. Because of increasing life expectancy, retirement years
for beneficiaries are prolonged. Changes in the nuclear family and dwindling
job opportunities cause financial hardships for the elderly. The Ministry of
Health and Welfare has estimated that an ideal benefit amount should equal 68
percent of the average wage among workers. Unless the public welfare pension
scheme changes, the combined employer-employee contribution for male workers
would have risen from 12.4 percent in 1985 to above 40 percent in the 21st
century. A reverse situation occurs when calculating an average net income
between a beneficiary and a worker. In an effort to eliminate the redundancy
of benefits and schemes of EPI and NPI (including four other mutual aid asso-
ciations and a special program for seamen), the public welfare pension plan
now covers all segments of the working-age population. The seamen's insurance
system was merged with the EPI program in 1986. The dual public welfare pen-
sion program provides uninsured protection to all Japanese residents.
                                     -6--


                      III. Analytical Framework

     The empirical model of the paper is based on the extended life-cycle
framework. Studies by Feldstein (1980). Hamermesh (1984), Mitchell and Fields
(1984), Ando et al. (1986), Bernheim (1987), Moffitt (1987) and Modigliani
(1988 demonstrate that this approach s the most common and useful framework
for applied analysis to examine saving and retirement behavior. Saving and
retirement behavior involve lifetime utility maximization with certainty.
This study assumes that lifetime utility is intertemporally separable and that
the interest effect exceeds the time preference effect. These simplifying
assumptions are helpful and fairly innocuous to the life—cycle framework.
Killingsworth (1986) thoroughly discusses the approach and the advantages of
these assumptions.

      Many recent applied analyses of life-cycle behavior have focused on
 saving and retirement behavior separately. Feldstein (1980) explicitly deve-
 lops the extended life—cycle model treating the labor force participation rate
 of older men endogenously. Hamermesh (1984) addresses jointness in decisions
about consumption and retirement. Consider a population group of elderly
whose average labor force participation rate is 30 percent. This does not
mean that 30 percent of the individuals among the elderly are almost always in
 the labor rorce and that the remaining 70 percent are almost completely
retired individuals. Rather, it means that the same individuals (within this
cohort) are sometimes in and sometimes out during the transitional period.
Their participation rate tends to decline gradually as the individuals age.
 Therefore, one possible hypothesis is that within a sex, a population group of
elderly has equal tastes and desires to offer the same amount of labor at any
given wage rate and wealth. Its rate represents the behavior of market acti-
vity in a lifetime labor supply (i.e. the proportion of time spent in the
 labor force during the lifetime). Although the retirement decision is an
 individual decision, an analysis of the labor force participation of elderly
workers is an analysis of retirement behavior (Boskin 1977). Although labor
force participation of the elderly depends on other factors such as the pro-
portion of people in the labor force, the aggregate data approach mitigates
the difficulties in controlling for individual taste, computing a wage for
nonworking population, and measuring an individuals health status (Ouggan
1984, and Breslaw and Stelcner 1987). The eligibility age for social security
retirement benefits was sixty before the reform of 1986 (as shown in the
Appendix). This study uses the labor force participation of elderly aged 60
and over as a proxy measure of retirement in the population of those who
expect to spend their lifetime economic activity in the labor force. Although
there are other ways of using the labor force participation of the young or
workers of all ages, the measurement biases are less severe if an implica-
tion regarding only retirement behavior is made by using the labor force par-
ticipation of the elderly.

     The extended life—cycle theory predicts that late retirement reduces per-
sonal saving during the preretirement period for consumption during a shor-
tened retirement period, and vice versa. Higher social security retirement
benefits reduce personal saving and induce earlier retirement, and vice versa. 6
The annuity value of the benefits does not change with the age of acceptance
                                    —7—


because there is not a delayed retirement credit in Japan. Therefore delayed
retirement time does not affect the amount of benefits. Needless to say, per-
sonal saving does not affect the social security retirement benefits.
Burkhauser (1979) demonstrates that such a system will not cause a labor-
leisure distortation. A choice of labor force participation of the elderly
a;ed 60 and over becomes less of a selection problem as a variable of retire-
ment behavior. The implication is that the amount of saving and social
security retirement benefits exerts different influences on the quantity of
lifetime labor supply. Conversely, labor supply and social security retire-
ment benefits affect life-cycle saving. Consequently, a model should reflect
not only the effects of social security retirement benefits upon the personal
saving and labor force behavior of the elderly, but alo the interactions bet-
ween the two behaviors, i.e., saving and labor supply.    Saving and labor
supply choices generally are represented by an individual i at time t,
       f(LF, SS, SE1) + e.1                                     (8)

LF =   z(S. SS SE) + e2
where S is personal saving, IF is the labor force participation rate of
men ages 60 and over to be a pri?,xy variable to measure a retirement beh-
vior of the elderly, SE1 is a vector of socio-economic characteristics.
SS. represents social security wealth with two different techniques9for
cajitalizing benefit streams. The first one is actUarial valuation employing
net social security wealth (SSN), gross social security wealth (SSG) and
social security tax contribution (SST). The second is simple valuation
employing present value method with non-constant interest rate by accumulating
and discounting social security retirement benefits (SSAB). and social
security tax contribution (SSAC). The e in (8) and (9) are stochastic error
terms, because there are components of pa?sonal saving and labor force par-
ticipation of the elderly that are affected by unmeasured factors.

     There are five aspects for capital resources: personal saving (household
saving), corporate saving, government saving, private saving (the sum of
personal and corporate saving) and national saving (the sum of private and
government saving). There are various factors which influence behaviors of
different types of saving. Each specialized study uses a different model and
makes specific assumptions. To characterize Japanese high saving rate,
personal saving is the most salient feature of saving behavior. Graham (1987)
demonstrates a better description of personal saving behavior than the
national one and he proves the consistency of statistical results with the
life-cycle hypothesis. Thus personal saving seems to be a more behaviorally
meaningful concept suggested by Ando (1986) than other types of saving.

     In spite of finding the negative relationship between elderly labor force
participation and saving by Feldstein (1980) and Modigliani and Sterling
(1983). Ishikawa (1987) addressed the high labor force participation rate of
the elderly in Japan as a major positive factor of the high saving rate.
Horioka (1990), however, argues that it does not necessarily raise the overall
personal saving rate from the views of life—cycle saving, and that the retire-
ment age has a significant negative impact on personal saving. A high labor
force participation of the elderly (i.e. later retirement) implies less need
                                     -8-


for retirement assets and therefore a lower saving rate is a characteristic
clue of the generalized life-cycle model. As for retirement, the elderly
workers can not be characterized in terms of a simple dichotomy full-time
labor force commitment versus full retirement. Generally, a transitional
period is closely associated with reduction in hours of work, weeks worked
during the year, and labor force commitment. A declining labor force cQmmit-
ment is another sign of retirement commitment. If the retirement age in a
population group is not specified, the labor force participation rate of the
aged is measured as a proxy variable of a retirement rate of the aged.

      The anticipated social security retirement benefits in old age are not
only an important factor in household wealth, but also the major component of
wealth in most retirement portfolios. With its compulsory government-directed
saving program, the social security tax payment system produces future social
security retirement benefits for retired workers during their retirement
period and until dealth. The studies on effects of social security retirement
benefits on saving in the United States has developed in the literature of
Feldstein (1974), Barro (1978), Darby (1979), Leimer and Lesnoy (1982),
Modigliani and Sterling (1983), Blinder, Gordon and Wise (1983), Modigliani
(1986, 1988) and Kotlikoff (1988). The significant progress in the Japanese
social security retirement program since the Second World War has not yet
clearly revealed its influence on the behavioral pattern of personal saving.
But everyone seems to agree that personal saving will be reduced by the
availability of expected future social security retirement benefits by pro-
viding income for consumption during the retirement period, i.e., the "benefit
effect," and personal saving will be increased by inducing earlier retirement
caused by expected future social security retirement benefits. The earlier
retirement means a longer period of retirement under a given life span. This
requires an accumulation of saving during the working period: the "retirement
effect." Thus, the net effect of social security retirement benefits on per-
sonal saving depends on the relative strength of these offsetting effects.

     It is interesting to note that before April 1986, the Japanese social
security system underwent a few major and a few minor institutional changes
shown in Section II. An introduction of eligibility for social security
retirement benefits while remaining on the job and a leap in benefits in 1965,
and an indexation of benefits to the price level in 1973 were major changes.
The variable 55 (SSN or SSG or SSI or SSAB or SSAC shown definitions of
variables in Table 3) denotes a social security wealth variable. The variable
SS*j reflects 1965's development of the program and is used to estimate a
different slope of the segments before and after 1965. SS*D2 indicates the
social security wealth variable multiplied by two dummy variables such as OX =
1 for 1965 through 1982 and zero otherwise, and DV = 1 for 1973 through 1982
and zero otherwise and observes the slope of the regression line after 1973.
Needless to say, incorrectly omitting a reflection from the institutional
change term will lead to a specification bias.

     Personal disposable income or labor, nonlabor income and tax would
measure the current flow of resources available to the household sector for
consumer ex?8nditures and saving in addition to financial assets by
households,    Boskiri and Kotlikoff (1985) point out that the strict life—
                                    -9-


cycle model is not enough to explain the United State's saving behavior.
Therefore, this study expands the life-cycle model by employing additional
explanatory variables.
      One aspect of the variable of life expectancy is that public opinion
surveys find that preparation for illness and other unexpected emergencies are
the motives for saving in Japan. Risk aversion and precautions are Japanese
characteristics demonstrated by Ilorioka (1988). An increase in life expec-
tancy is a proxy measurement of healthiness, i.e. less illness and it would
reduce personal saving. A similar line of argument is provided by Horioka
(1990) that the ratio of the population of the aged to the working-age popula-
tion has a significant negative impact on the saving rate. An increase in
life expectancy which stems from healthiness, contributes to the aging popula-
tion. Thus the life expectancy would have a negative influence on saving.
One may argue that an increase in life expectancy will increase the period of
retirement and necessitate more saving for the prolonged retirement period.
This view of the argument is an interesting theoretical consideration but the
argument is a weak one, which is proved theoretically by Graham (1987). As for
an influence of life expectancy on labor force participation Hamermesh (1984)
observes that an increasing life expectancy does not lead to a lengthening of
the average person's work life. In his U.S. study on the jointness of leisure
and goods consumption i.n household production, he found that the extra years
of life are consumed as leisure. Seike (1982) finds similar results in his
empirical study on Japan. For these studies we can conclude that an increase
in life expectancy has a negative influence on the labor force participation
of the elderly. Life expectancy as a proxy measurement of healthyness may
have a positive influence on working life, namely, late retirement, although
the health variables used by Hausman and Wise (1985). Honig and Hanoch (1986)
and Burtless (1986) are the self—assured health report from individual survey
data on the U.S. studies.

      Financial assets are characterized by great divisibility, namely, great
liquidity. More recently, in Japan, financial assets have been creating addi-
tional wealth in household portfolios. It seems that the lower- and middle—
income classes are stimulated and motivated to enter the liquid assets market
formerly targeted exclusively for the higher income class, as well as for cor-
porations preferring to deploy their holdings in more speculative investments.
In particular, the amount of financial assets held by households has more than
tripled in Japan since 1975. Noland (1988) analyzes Japanese portfolio allo-
cation behavior and finds substitutes between financial assets, and money and
time deposits. Unlike non-liquid assets, such as expected social security
retirement benefits for the retirement period, financial assets may exert a
negative effect (see Burtless 1986) and a different magnitude on the labor
force participation of the elderly, i.e., the retirement decision. For the
variable of education, the more general argument is that investments in human
capital raise the return to additional years of work. The more educated tend
to retire later and to save more. The empirical evidences on the U.S. studies
show the positive relationship between educational attainment and the elderly
labor force behavior (Ouggan 1984, Housman and Wise 1985, Honig and Hanoch
1985, and Slade (1987).

     Unlike the United States, housing acquisitions stem from non—pecuniary
motives in portfolio allocation by households and housing is less liquid in
                                   — 10 —




Japan. Evidence from the U.S. study by Hayashi, Ito and Slemrod (1981)
shows that just the opposite seems to occur in the United States. Housing
acquisition behavior and financial assets should separately be analyzed to see
an influence on saving behavior. Japanese housing conditions are still made-
quate, and people want to own a house within their lifetime (Takayama, 1982
and Shinohara, 1983). This desire sterns from a basically agricu lt:
national characteristic which has historically influenced the behavior of
holding physical assets by households. In Japan, physical assets such as
housing, are usually held for life and for the purpose of bequests in the life
cycle framework rather than for the speculative purpose of wealth accumula-
tion, as often occurs in the United States.11 This bequest purpose of
obtaining one's own house seems to stimulate personal saving and then the
saving declines at acquisition or purchase time. Modigliani (1986) points out
that the consideration of bequest motives in the life—cycle framework is con-
sistent, although during the retirep!nt period assets decline and reach zero
in the basic life-cycle hypothesis.

     Retained earnings are business saving in the private sector and proxies
for current and future capital gains. They are treated as exogenous with
respect to the personal saving decision because there are separate incentives
governing the behavior of household and corporate sectors (Auerbach, 1982).
Retained earnings can be considered a measure of saving whether or not they
arise from pension plan contributions. They represent an additional invest-
ment in corporate equity by stockholders. Looking at retained earnings
another way, we might find that retained earnings imply a substitution for
personal saving (Modigliani and Sterling, 1.983). Business firms accumulate
retirement pension allowances for their employees and transfer retirement pen-
sion allowances into retained earnings in Japan. Increased retirement pen-
sions undertaken by business firms for their workers tend to discourage
workers from personal saving because of an increase in anticipated retirement
pensions provided by the firm in the futuce. Therefore the effect by retained
earnings on personal saving is ambiguous.1°
     The labor f1rce participation rate of elderly women has been growing over
the past decade.    The question is whether the increase affects the elderly
male labor force participation or not. It is important to understand the
issues of the elderly labor market and the cost of social security retirement
benefits. Retirement studies by Henig and Hanoch (1985) and Hurd (1988) find
that wives in the labor force positively affect the male labor force par-
ticipation, namely later retirement in the United States. The effect of the
total level of agricultural employment on labor force participation of the
elderly takes several possible forms. High agricultural employment is often
believed to encourage high labor force participation of the elderly because
self-employment allows a varying choice of work hours and work intensity, and
it has no mandatory retirement age or company pension system to encourage
retirement at a specific age. Alternatively, retirement from full—time agri-
cultural employment may be easier because it is less costly to care for the
aging period on a farm than in urban settings.

     Households are very concerned with not only current but also future
inflation. A surge in inflation will reduce a real value of household wealth
and induce households to increase their saving to maintain the real value of
                                   — 11   —




wealth.  This view is explained by Sato's (1987) wealth target hypothesis. On
the other hand, inflationary expectations will reduce a real rate of return on
saving and in turn induce households to reduce their saving (Horioka, 1987).
Rampant inflation causes an increase in uncertainty about the future. This
phenomenon may raise a precautionary purpose for saving. The foremost exter-
nal factors were factors such as the oil crisis of 1973-74 and 1979-early
1980s. The first oil crisis of 1973—74 raised the personal saving rate and
the second oil crisis did not raise the rate but rather saving declined in
Japan. The relation between inflation and personal saving seems to be a
short—term factor as Sato (1987) discusses. Sato gets positive results in the
analysis of financial—asset wealth target. The influence of inflation on
household saving is theoretically ambiguous and leads to a qualitative and
quantitative conclusion. Therefore, this analysis includes a dummy variable
to distinguish an inflationary period. To differentiate the oil crisis from
the rest of period 03 = I is used for observations from 1973 to 1982 and zero
otherwise.

      The main data used to estimate the model are annual data from Annual
Report on National Account covering the period from 1951 to 1982. Since
national income series are revised a few times, the series before 1951 is poor
in quality, and the next series starting from 1951 runs into the j97Os, the
data of analysis start at the year of 1951. The latest version is very exten-
sive and goes back to 1965. Therefore, the study includes a dummy variable to
identify and to treat the data series as D4 = 1 for 1965 through 1982 and 04 =
o otherwise. Other data have been taken from the Labor Force Survey for labor
force participation, Social Insurance Agency Annual Report for social security
wealth, Vital Statistics of Japan for life expectancy, Economics Statistics
Annual for price index and interest rates, Educational Statistical Survey for
educational attainment. All data are annual observations, and the time period
of analysis is from 1951 to 1982. A list of variables used and their summary
statistics are given in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively. The data of per—
sonl saving, male labor force participation aged sixty and over, disposable
 income and social security wealth variables are in Table 5.
                                     - 12   —




                             IV.   Empirical Results

      The data used to estimate the model is an annual tine series covering the
period from 1951 to 1982. The simultaneous equation model consists of an
equation for personal saving and an equation for labor force participation of
men ages 60 and over. Tables 2-1 and 2-2 present the results obtained trom
two—stage least squares (2SLS) with correction for serial correlation.1      In
order to compare the results of two different techniques for capitalizing
social security wealth streams, model I (SSN), model II (SSG) and nodel LII
 (SST) in Table 2—1 pertain to actuarial valuation and model I (SSAB) and model
II (SSAC) in Table 2—2 pertain to simple valuation. An overview of the
results in Tables 2-1 and 2—2 indicates that all the estimated coefficients of
saving and labor force have the anticipated signs. The coefficients of pri-
mary interest, that of saving and labor force, confirm that an increase in
labor force participation of the elderly, i.e., later retirement, reduce per-
sonal saving and an increase in personal saving induces earlier retirement,
namely, lower labor force participation of the elderly. In most cases the
magnitude and significance levels of the the saving and labor force coef-
ficients do not vary dramatically between the two specifications. The results
support the arguments of Feldstein (1980), Ando, Vamashita and Murayama
(1985), Bernheim (1987), and Horioka (1990) that the determination of the
saving and retirement decisions certainly seem to be endogeneous. The esti-
mated coefficients on personal saving and the labor force participation rate
of the elderly are statistically significant and support the hypothesis of
interdependency of personal saving and retirement. One percentage point
decrease in the the labor force participation rate, namely earlier retirement,
tends to stimulate the the personal saving rate from .4 to .6 percentage
points. The coefficients in the saving equations ranging between -.4 and - .6
imply very meaningful sensitivity of personal saving to this measure of
retirement behavior. The cross-county study by Graham (1987) shows statisti-
cally insignificant and smaller positive coefficients with ordinary least-
square estimates. The similar study by Feldstein (1980), however, indicates
the negative impact on personal saving ranging from - .3 to - .6 with two-stage
least—squares estimates. Horioka (1989) finds the range between -.4 and —.6
by parameter estimate based on data for 1916-1962 period of the 21 OECD
countries. The point elasticities evaluated at the sample means are -2.5
(1951—1964), —1.9 (1965—1972), and -1.4 (1973—1982) on average. Although the
elasticities are elastic, declining elasticities show that personal saving
behavior tends to become less and less responsive to changes in retirement
behavior. In the columns of labor force in Tables 2-1 and 2-2 one percentage
point increase in the the average personal saving rate encourages the elderly
to leave the labor market in the range between .26 and .69 percentage points.
A decrease in the labor force participation of the elderly means earlier
retirement. In terms of elasticity with different periods, the point elasti-
cities of labor force participation of the elderly with respect to personal
saving at the sample means range froni - .05 to - .13 between 1951 and 1964, from
-.07 to —.18 between 1965 to 1972, and from —.09 to —.23 between 1973 to 1982.
In general, an increase in elasticities implies that although very small, the
retirement behavior gradually becomes more responsive to change in personal
saving.
                                   — 13   —




     The estimated coefficients of social security wealth variables are one of
principal interest in this analysis. Estimated coefficients in both saving
and labor force equations are generally qualitatively consistent with both
actuarial valuation in Table 2—1 and simple valuation in Table 2-2. The esti-
mated coefficients of Model III SST in Table 2-1 and Model II SSAC in Table
2-2 are normally larger than SSN. 550 and SSAB. However, quantitative dif-
ferences based on actuarial and simple valuations are quite similar between
SSN and SW measurement and SSAB measurement, and between SST measurement and
SSAC measurement. The results of this study provide that two different tech-
niques for capitalizing social security wealth streams possibly have similar
depressive effects on personal saving. With respect to the effect of social
security variables on saving the estimated coefficients of the time-series
analysis are smaller than the studies done by Noguchi (1983): .010 - .148, and
Sasaki and Tachibanaki (1985):   .14 - .291. using the data of Family Saving
Survey in Japan. For the studies of cross—section of countries, Feldstein
(1980) reports .21 - .37 and Graham (1987) shows .02 - .09. U.S. studies on
the effect of saving is in the range between .03 and 0.117 by Munnell (1974)
by using time—series data, and in the range between .695 and .941 for indivi-
duals and .773 — 1.37 for couples by Bernheim (1987) by using Longitudinal
Retirement History Survey. The results in this study cannot be simply compared
with those previous results done by Japanese and U.S. researchers shown in
Table 2-3 because the units of value are different. Evidence presented in
this study suggests that a 1 percent increase in social security retirement
benefits depress personal saving during 1973 and 1982 from 2 percent to 3.1
percent. Personal saving in Japan is very sensitive to a change in the social
security retirement benefits.

      What is of special interest in the regression results is to examine the
implications for personal saving. Before the introduction of eligibility for
social security retirement benefits while remaining on the job and a large
leap of the benefits in 1965, the social security retirement benefits had a
positive effect on personal saving, shown by the SS variables in the saving
equations in Tables 2—1 and 2-2. During the period of 1951 through 1964, per-
sonal saving increased approximately 2.3 thousand yen per capita in the saving
equation of Model I SSN. The major change in the program in 1965 negatively
affected saving behavior which is represented by the SS*OI variable in the
saving equations. With the similar calculation in Model I 59.1, the increase
in SSN over the period of 1965 through 1972 resulted in approximately a 2.8
thousand yen reduction on personal saving per capita in real terms. The next
wave of change was the introduction of automatic price adjustment for benefits
 in 1973, because of the oil crisis, and the benefits also increased in that
year. The personal saving per capita in real terms decreased by approximately
13.0 thousand yen during the period of 1973 through 1982. The net reduction
of benefits during the period of 1951 through 1982 was approximately 13.5
thousand yen per capita.

     Saving equations in Tables 2—1 and 2-2 show that a reduction in labor
force participation, (i.e., earlier retirement), makes individuals in the
preretirement period save more for consumption during a prolonged retirement
period. The estimated impact on personal saving by earlier retirement was
about a 21.2 thousand yen increase in personal saving per capita in real terms
                                    — 14 —



from 1951 to 1964, a 55.5 thousand yen increase from 1965 to 1972, and a 97.8
thousand yen increase from 1973 to 1982. Hence, during the period from 1951
to 1982, the absolute amount of the upward impact on personal saving was a
174.5 thousand yen increase, which was about thirteen times of the amount of
upward impact of the social security retirement benefits in saving equation
Model I SSN. However, as shown in footnote 7, to discuss a retirement effect
the estimated coefficients on social security variables in the labor force
equation should be examined to avoid downward bias. The retirement effect
from 1951 through 1982 is aproximately .5 thousand yen per capita. The net
impact on personal saving during the year of 1951 through 1982 was a reduction
in personal saving by 13.0 thousand yen per capita (SSN). Similar calcula-
tions for the net impacts from the statistical results provides a 10.7
thousand yen reduction (550), a 59.4 thousand yen (SST), a 12.1 thousand yen
(SSAB). and a 86.4 thousand yen (SSAC). The downward impact of SST and SSAC
models are about five or seven times as great as SSN, 550 and SSAB models.
Unlike the assertion by Bernheim (1987). the results of this study find that
actuarial valuation compared to simple valuation does not tend to overstate
the incentive effects of social security retirement benefits on personal
saving. In Japan, the benefit effect outweighs the retirement effect and the
net effect is consequently a downward pressure on personal saving.

     The coefficients of SS*DJ. (an introduction of eligibility for benefits
while remaining on job and other developments in the program in 1965) and
SS*02 (an introduction of automatic price adjustments for benefits in 1973) in
labor force equations in Tables 2—1 and 2-2 are negative as expected. The
coefficients are small and similar to Saike's (1982) finding (—.002 - -.003)
in a Japanese study. Using the method of actuarial valuation, Slade (1981)
has —.001 and Burkhauser (1979) shows a range from -.002 to —.011 in the U.S.
studies. In this study, an increase in social security retirement benefits by
one thousand yen induced the elderly to retire in the range between .001 and
.03 percentage points during 1965 through 1972, and in the range between .002
and .08 during 1973 through 1982. The impact seems to be small. Put dif-
ferently the point elasticities of labor force participation of the elderly
with respect to personal saving at the sample means are in the range between
—.05 and -.1 during 1965 through 1972 and —.2 to -.6 during 1973 through 1982.
A one percent rise in the benefits induced the elderly to leave the labor
market by a .2 percent to a .6 percent after 1973. An increase in the elasti-
city from the period of 1965—1972 to 1973—1982 implies that the retirement
behavior becomes more sensitive and responsive to a rise in the social
security retirement benefits, though the results indicate a quantitively small
response.

     The estimated coefficients on the variable indicates that the disposable
income is negative in the saving equations. The negative sign shows that the
elasticity of the average personal saving rate with respect to disposable
income is smaller than one. Two saving equations in Table 2-2 have only sta-
tistically significant coefficients. The negative coefficients of disposable
income in the labor force equation in Table 2-2 suggests a decrease in labor
force participation, namely life time labor supply, as income level rises.
     An overview of the results in Tables 2—1 and 2-2 indicates that all esti-
mated coefficients of Life as a proxy measurement of healthyness have the
                                    - 15   —




anticipated  signs. In most cases the magnitudes and significance levels of
the coefficients do not vary dramatically among the saving equations.
Although motivations for saving are interchangeable within the range of life-
time planned saving, motivations come from several sources, such as pre-
cautionary purposes, speculative purposes and life-cycle purposes. The
precautionary motive for illness would weaken as health status improves. The
relative importance of motives for household saving is seen in Horioka (1988)
and this econometric empirical result is congruent with his survey data
demonstration. The point elasticities evaluated at the sample means are in
the range between -1.88 and -2.16. One percent increase in life expectancy,
namely healthiness, reduces personal saving from a 1.68 to a 2.16 percent.
One way to gauge the magnitude of estimation is to assume 40 years of accumu-
lated personal saving lower by from 91 to 104 thousand yen per capita at the
sample means by the age of sixty. The recent figures will be much larger
using current data than the statistical sample means. For labor force
equations the result of the life variable is consistent with the hypothesis of
the jointness of leisure and consumption in the life-cycle context formulated
by Namermesh (1984). The estimated negative coefficients show that a one per-
centage point increase in life expectancy reduces labor force participation of
the elderly by the range of from 1.3 to 2.1 percentage points. An increasing
 life expectancy alone does not lead to substantial postponing of economic
activity in the labor market. Seike (1982) also finds the negative effect of
 increase in aging on labor supply in the Japansese study. The elderly tend to
change from income preference to leisure preference as they age. Put dif-
ferently, the extra years of life are consumed as leisure.

     Financial assets have a negative effect on labor force participation and
a one percentage point increase in the average financial asset rate causes
about a .5 percentage point decrease in the labor force participation in Table
2-2. The effect is significant in Japan. The study on the U.S. by Burtless
(1986) also finds that the average retirement age is 1.1 years earlier among
the elderly who have assets of $25,000 and more than the wealth holder with
less than $25,000. The estimated coefficients of education are theoretically
consistent and positive in saving and labor force equations as expected but
almost always insignificant unlike the study on the U.S. done by Hausman and
Wise (1985), Honig and Hanoch 1985), and Slade (1981).

     The negative coefficients of housing are congruent with the study done by
Noland (1968). Noland finds the substitute between saving and housing in his
portfolio analysis of Japanese households. Looking at average personal
housing expenditure rate another way, the results in Table 2-1 means that a
one percentage point increase in housing expenditure rate lowers the personal
saving rate between 2 and 2.5 percentage points. An increase housing expen-
diture is also partly a reflection of the growth of the housing stock.
Therefore it implies less need for saving for bequest purposes (Modigliani
1986). The negative coefficient suggests that the point elasticity of the
average personal saving rate with respect to the personal housing expenditure
rate is less than one. As for retained earnings, the extended life-cycle
saving in this study reflects the impact of the average rate of corporate
retained earnings on personal saving. As proxies for current and future capi-
tal gains, retained earnings have a short-run effect on personal saving in
                                   — 16 —




addition to their long-run wealth effect. The coefficients are qualitatively
consistent in Tables 2—1 and 2-2. The positive coefficients in Table 2-1 show
that a one percentage point increase in retained earnings raises the average
saving rate about .5 percentage point. However, the retained earnings
variable is likely to be an underestimate of net corporate saving. The quali-
tative results seem to show a complementarity between personal saving and
retained earnings.

     Turning attention to the female labor force, the estimated coefficients
on the variable indicating the female labor force in the labor force equations
are statistically significant and positive for all models. The magnitude of
coefficients implies that a one percentage point increase in female labor
force participation, aged 60 and over, would lead to a rise in the male labor
force participation, aged 60 and over, by from .5 to .8 percentage points.
The elderly tend to retire later. The results suggest ideas similar to those
posited in U.S. studies. lionig and Hanoch (1985), and Hurd (1988) analyze
elderly male workers' retirement behavior and how a wife in the labor force
affects the retirement of male counterparts and joint retirement of the
elderly. The probability of retirement decreases by from .3 to .4 when a wife
is in the labor force in the U.S. (Honig and Hanoch). The effect in a similar
study on the U.S. by Hurd is .47. Although the explanatory power in this
study is different from the U.S. studies, the implication suggests the comple—
mentarity of leisure by male and female elderly workers in Japan. Agricul-
ture's coefficient is positive and statistically significant in the labor
force equation in Table 2—2. This suggests that the decline in the agri-
cultural sector reduces the labor force participation of the elderly.

     The ratio of personal saving to personal disposable income was above 21%
from 1973 through 1978 after the unexpected oil crisis that caused higher
inflation in the 1970s and early 1980s. The variable 03, a dummy variable,
distinguishes an inflationary period from the rest of the period. The esti-
mated positive coefficients on an inflationary period, 03, in both the per-
sonal saving and labor force participation equations indicate that the
deviation of real saving and income from its normal position will make the
individual anxious about future prospects. Therefore an increase in uncer-
tainty caused by high inflation makes the individual motivated to increase
personal saving, and to stay in the labor market. Horioka (1989) also finds a
positive effect of inflation on the private saving rate by using the data of
the 21 OECO countries for 1976—1982. The coefficients on 03 in the labor
force equations are positive and statistically significant. The results imply
that an increase in a price level, namely, higher inflation, has an effect on
labor force attachment among the elderly. As for D4, it is a dummy variable
denoting the Annual Report on National Account for New SNA data as explained
in Section III. The results indicate a positive effect of New SNA data on the
interpretation of personal saving and labor force participation by treating
the series of data for New SNA. The results are in the range between 16 and
22 percentage points in saving equations and 8 and 9 percentage points in
labor force equations in Table 2—1.
                                     - 17   —




                               V.   CONCLUSIONS

     The paper examines the impact of social security retirement benefits on
personal saving and the labor force participation of the elderly, and also on
the interdependency between saving and retirement behaviours. The results
underscore the qualitative and quantitative importance of the social security
retirement benefits. Calculations based on actuarial and simple valuations
(two different techniques for capitalizing the streams of social security
retirement benefits) provide quantitatively similar depressive effects on per-
sonal saving. Considering the two major changes in institutional programs in
1965 and in 1973 the benefit effect outweighs the retirement effect between
1951 and 1982. The results indicate substantial evidence of the downward net
impact on personal saving; approximately a 11.9 thousand yen per capita reduc-
tion resulted from the wealth measurement {SSN, 550 and SSAB) and about a 72.9
thousand yen per capita reduction on average resulted from tax contribution
measurement (551 and SSAC). Moreover, the point elasticities evaluated at the
sample means are elastic and quite large. The finding implies that the per-
sonal saving is very responsive to changes in the social security retirement
benefits. The study also presents evidence with respect to the potential
importance of the effects of social security retirement benefits on life-cycle
labor supply. The eligibility of the benefits induce the elderly to leave
their jobs or to restrict market work and thereby reduce the labor force par-
ticipation of the elderly, which results in earlier retirement of older
workers.

     One of the important conclusions of the analysis is that there exists
interdependency between personal saving and labor force participation of the
elderly. Saving behavior became less and less responsive to change in labor
force participation of the elderly between 1951 and 1982, while the labor
force participation of the elderly, i.e., retirement behavior, came to be more
responsive to change in personal saving. However, the results of personal
saving behavior influenced by social security retirement benefits and labor
force participation of the elderly (proxy indication of tine of retirement)
reveal higher sensitivity with elastic elasticity than the results of labor
force participation of the elderly influenced by the social security retire-
ment benefits and personal saving with inelastic elasticity.

     It is interesting to note that an increase in life expectancy. i.e., an
improvement in healthiness, reduces emergency funds which stems from the
Japanese characteristic of saving motivated by precaution. However, an
increase in life expectancy does not encourage the elderly to remain in the
labor force. They prefer to enjoy leisure in the extra years of life rather
to than earn income from economic activity. Although far from explicit, the
results provide an explanation of joint retirement. Because a rise in elderly
female labor force participation does not expel the elderly male from the
labor market, but rather complements it. The estimated coefficients on infla-
tion have a positive effect on both personal saving and labor force par-
ticipation of the elderly. An increase in uncertainty and deviation of real
saving from its normal position stimulate personal saving. A rampant infla-
tion also causes a strong labor force attachment among the elderly.
                                    - 18   —




     Individuals contemplate the amount of their own future social security
retirement benefits for the retirement period. The motivation for saving
is much more complex than simply for purposes of retirement. And many factors
also influence retirement behavior. However the recent development of a social
security program in Japan substantially depresses personal saving and induces an
earlier retirement of older workers. The policy implications of the findings
are clearly visible. For instance, a rise in eligibility and the amount of
social security retirement benefits and a rise in the social security retire-
ment tax which is closely linked to the future retirement benefits, would
vastly reduce personal saving and clearly induce later retirement. The poli-
cies would make the elderly stay in the labor market because the results in
this study signify a relatively small response of retirement behavior to a
change in personal saving and social security retirement benefits. Moreover,
to mitigate the fears of the elderly for their financial problems during their
retirement period, an increase in the retirement benefits is fundamental.
A gap between the eligibility of age for the benefits and actual retirement
among the elderly may require an initiative of the government and the private
sector's cooperation in terms of an employment policy for the elderly.
                                     —19—


                                   FOOTNOTES


*We are indebted to Michael Grossman, Koichi Hamada, Charlotte Muller,
lakatoshi Ito, Kazuo Sato, Hugh Patrick. John 0. Worrall, Naci Mocan and
Pamela Mobilia for their helpful comments on preliminary drafts of this
paper. The opinions expressed in this paper, as well as any errors, are
ours. The original paper was presented at the Japan Economic Seminar at
Harvard University.


1.   Hayashi (1986), Horioka (1990), and Ohmae (1988) explicitly discuss

     personal saving in terms of valuing depreciation, capital transfer,

     interest paid by household, housing investment, and capital gains

     and losses in the case of the United States and Japan.

2. CCSP/BOJ Survey is done by the Central Council for Savings Promotion

     (Chochiku Zokyo Chuo Iinkai), a private but government-encouraged

     organization, with the assistance of the Bank of Japan.

3. Feldstein (1974; 1982), Feldstein and Pellechio (1979), Munnell (1974),

     and Darby (1979) find a significant negative effect of social security

     retirement benefits on personal saving, whereas Barro (1978). Blinder,

     Gordon and Wise (1983). Leimer and Lesnoy (1982), Lesnoy and Leimer

     (1985). and Modigliani and Sterling (1963) find it to be insignificant.

     A cross-country test by Graham (1987) also finds an insignificant impact

     of social security upon private saving unlike Feldstein (1980)'s findings.

4. Horioka (1990) suggests that a high labor force participation, namely the

     late retirement in Japan, may have a negative influence on personal

     saving.

5. Graham (1987) conducts an interesting econometric test by using the labor

     force participation rate of females as an endogeneous variable with two-
                                                           — 20   -




     stage      least squares.

6. Boskin (1977) stresses that social security retirement benefits influence

     the elderly to leave the job or to restrict market work, thereby reducing

     the labor supply of the elderly (see Pellechio 1979, Burtless and Moffitt

     1984 and 1985, Hurd and Boskin 1984, Mitchell and Fields 1984, and Burtless

     1986, which support this induced retirement effect).

7. The omission of a LF variable from the model would cause the estimated

     coefficient on the SS variable to be biased towards zero. To be specific

     consider the following variables model:

     S =         +          +                       1.
           a0        a1SS        a2LF
     where S is personal saving, SS is social security retirement benefits and

     LF is labor force participation variables, a1 c 0, and a2 <                             0.
     If we omit LF, the estimate is
                                        2.


     From equation 1.

     ES.SS/ZSS2 =                +                                    3.
                            a1       a2ZLF.SS/ESS2
     Fron equation 2, we get

     ES.SS/ESS2 =                              4.
                  a1
     Based on the omitted variable formula we have
     a= a1 + a2b                      6.

     Where a1 <        0,   a2 c 0, b <             0,   and a2b > 0.      b is the regression coefficient

     of 1$ on SS (LF =
                                     b0    +    bSS).
     If magnitudes of a1 and a2b are equal, both offset each other. 4                                a.

           tends to bias toward zero, if F                     is     omitted from the saving function.

8.   Individual private pensions are still at an early stage in Japan and the

     data are not available to integrate the variable into the model. The
                                           — 21 —




   expected influence of this factor on retirement and on saving behavior
   may be clearly visible. Difficulty to reconstruct the variable and to

    verify the influence empirically stems from inadequate data.

9. The social security wealth variable in this study employs gross social

    security wealth (SSG) constructed as follows: the SSG of the typical

    individual of age a is defined as

   SSG =             Ab (K-Z)Y LtI e'(t dt,
       a                    t     1a
            K(>60)
   where I is a maximum life time, K is a retirement age, 60 is an eligible

    age for social security retirement benefits, A is a growth rate of per

    capita income, b is a base rate of retirement benefit which is assumed to

    be same for each person with same income level, Z is an age of beginning

    to work, V is an annual disposable income,              is probability of an

    individual of age a surviving until t, and r is the discount rate.

    Social security tax contribution (SST) of an individual of age a is

    defined as:

              a                          —
                                       K(>60)
    SST =
                  Rtyter(tdt       +   J
                                                RtVtLti
                                                          e_(t_dt,

    where R is a ratio of social security tax per covered worker of age a to

    per capita disposable income. The net social security wealth (SSN) of

    an individual age is obtained as:



    SSN =             Ab (K-Z)V  L e_r(tdt - a            R v e (t_a)d   -
            K(>60)          t ta                      2

            Kç>60)              —r(t—a) dt.
                      RVLfe
    In constructing the social security wealth variable, Leimer and Lesnoy

    (1982) and Lesnoy and Leimer (1985) suggest modifying the original social
                                      — 22 —




    security   wealth variable used by Feldstein (1974) and Munnell (1974).

    This study takes into account the suggestion by Leimer and Lesnoy (1982).

10. Hall (1978) intensively discusses the lagged level of disposable income,

    namely past income, whióh has lack of predictive power for consumption,

    namely saving, in the context of the life cycle—permanent income hypothe-

    sis.

11. In 1983. 72.2 percent of the declared value of bequests were in the form

    of housing which includes land (Oekle 1986).

12. Horioka (1988) emphasizes that a household which obtains a house within

    five years has a higher saving rate because of a housing loan than other

    households. Japanese banks require about 32% (a relatively high down—

    payment) for the purchase of a house, compared with the 10% to 20% typi-

   cally required by U.S. banks. Thus Japanese households have to save in

    advance to purchase a house due to the uneasiness of consumer credit.

    It is quite possible that the recent increasing availability of housing

    loans would also decrease a housing purpose saving in the life cycle

    framework in Japan.

13. The data for business firms' accumulated retirement pensions for workers

    and individual private pensions are not available to integrate the

   variable into the model for this study. The expected influence of

    these factors on the labor force participation and on the saving behavior

   may seem obvious. it is, however, extremely difficult to reconstruct and

   verify the influence empirically because of inadequate data.

14. The Labor Force Participation of Women Fujin Rodo no Jitsujo. The Department

   of Labor, 1982, 1984, 1987 and 1988.
                                    — 23 —



15. In the model of simultaneous equations in this study, in order for the

   equation to be identified, the order and the rank conditions of then-

   tifiability was examined. The equations are overidentified and the rank

   condition is satisfied. Therefore, a choice of consistent estimation in

   the study is two-stage least squares (2SLS). For detail, see Oamodar Pg.

   Gujarati, Basic Econometrics, McGraw—hill, 1988, pp. 571—607, and Jan

   Kmenta, Elements of Econometrics, Macmillan, 1986, pp. 660-689.

   The study controlled for the National Pension plan by using a dummy

   variable beginning in 1961. The coefficient was statistically insigni-

   ficant, with little qualitative and quantitative changes. The reason

   being the functional characteristics of the program (explained in

   section II and Appendix). The dummy variable was deleted from the regres-

   sion analysis.
                                    - 24   —




                                  REFERENCES



Ando, Albert, "Comment" in Stanley Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomic Annual

     1988, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1986, pp. 211-20.

       Michiko Vamashita, and Atsuyoshi Murayama. "Laifu Saikuru

     Kasetsu ni Motozuku Shohi-Chochiku no Koudo Bunseki," Keizaibunseki,

     Japanese Government of Economic Planning Agency, January 1986, No. 101.

     pp. 25—139 (in Japanese).

Auerbach, Alan, "Issues in the Measurement and Determinants of Business

     Savings," National Bureau of Economic Research, November 1982. Working

     Paper No. 1024.

Barro, Robert, The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving: Evidence

     from the U.S. Time Series, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise

     Institute, 1978.

Bernheim, Douglas B., "The Economic Effects of Social Security: Toward a

     Reconciliation of Theory and Measurement," Journal of Public Economics,

     August 1987, Vol. 33, pp. 273—304.

Blinder, Alan S., Roger II. Gordon, and Donald E. Wise, "Social Security

     Bequests and the Life Cycle Theory of Savings: Cross Sectional Tests."

     in Franco Modigliani and Richard Hemming. eds., The Determinants of

     National Saving and Wealth, New York, St. Martin, 1983. pp. 89—122.

Boskin, Michael, "Social Security and Retirement Decisions." Economic

     Inquiry, January 1977, Vol. 15, pp. 1-23.

        and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Public Debt and U.S. Saving:

     A New Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis," National Bureau of Economic
                                         - 25   —




        Research, June 1985, Working Paper No. 1646.
Breslapi, Jon A., and Morton, Stelcner, "The Effect of Health on the Labor

        Force Behavior of Elderly Men in Canada." Journal of Human Resources,

        Fall   1989. vol. 22. pp. 490—517.

Burkhauser, Richard V.. "The Pension Acceptance Decision of Older Workers,"

        Journal of Human_Resources.   Winter    1979, Vol. 14, pp. 63—75.

Burtless, Gary. "Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases, and the

        Timing of Retirement," Review of Economic Studies, October 1986, Vol. 53,

        pp. 781—805.

_____     and Robert A. Moffitt, "The Joint Choice of Retirement Age and

        Postretirement Hours of Work," Journal of Labor Economics, April

        1985, Vol. 3, pp. 209-36.

Darby, Michael, The Effects of Social Security on Income and the Capital

        Stock,   Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1979.
Oekle, Robert. "The Importance of Intergenerational Transfers in Japanese

        Aggregate Household Saving," Japan Economic Seminar, Discussion Paper.

        Johns Hopkins University, 1986.

Duggan, James E., "The Labor-Force Participation of Older Workers," Industrial

        and Labor Relations Review, April 1964, Vol. 37, pp. 416-30.

Feldstein, Martin, "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate

        Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, September/October

        1974, Vol. 82, pp. 905-26.

_____     "Social   Security and Saving: The Extended Life Cycle Theory,"

        American Economic Review, May 1976, Vol. 66, pp. 77—86.

          "International Differences in Social Security and Saving," Journal of
                                           — 26 —




        Public   Economics, 1980, Vol. 14, pp. 225—44.

_____    "Social    Security and Private Saving: Reply," Journal of Political

        Economy, June 1982, Vol. 90, pp. 630-42.

_____    and Anthony Pellechio, "Social Security and Household Wealth Accumula-

        tion: New Microeconometric Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics,

        August 1979, Vol. 61, pp. 361—8.

Graham. John W., "International Differ.#..s in Saving Rates and the Life

        Cycle Hypothesis,t' European Economic Review, December 1987, Vol. 31,

        pp. 1509-29.

Hall, Robert E .,      'Stochastic   Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income

        Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy, December

        1978. Vol. 86, pp. 971-87.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., "Life—Cycle Effects on Consumption and Retirement,"

        Journal of Labor Economics, July 1984, Vol. 2, pp. 353—70.

Hausman, Jerry A., and David A. Wise, "Social Security, Health Status and

        Retirement," in David A. Wise, ed., Pensions, Labor. and Individual

        Choice, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 1985, pp. 159-91.

Ha'yashi. Fumio, "Why Is Japan's Saving Rate So Apparently High?" in

        Stanley Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomic Annual 1986, Cambridge,

        MIT Press, 1986, pp. 147-234.

_____     Taketoshi Ito, and Joel Slemrod. "Housing Finance Imperfections

        and Private Saving: A Comparative Simulation Analysis of the U.S. and

        Japan," National Bureau of Economic Research, June 1987, Working Paper

        No. 2272.

Honig, Marjorie, and Giora Hanoch, "Partial Retirement as a Separate Mode
                                        - 27   —




     of    Retirement Behavior," Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1985. Vol. 20,

     pp. 21—46.

Horioka, Charles Vuji, "Nihon ni okeru Kakeichochiku no Kettei Voin to Maruyu
        Haishi no Eikyo ni tsuite (On the Determinants of Household Saving and

        the Impact of the Abolition of the •Maruyu System in Japan)," Financial

        Review, March 1987, Vol. 4, pp. 27-39.

____ • "On    the Relationship Between Housing Purchase and Household Saving in

        Japan," The rnstitute of Social and Economic Research, Osaka

        University, 1988, ISER Series No. 132,

_____     "Why is Japan's Private Saving Rate So High?" in Ryuzo Sato and

        Takashi Negishi, eds., Developments in Japanese Economics, Tokyo,

        Academic Press, 1989, pp. 145-78.

____      "Why Is Japan's Household Saving Rate So High? A Literature

        Survey." Journal of the Japanese and rnternational Economics, March

        1990, Vol. 4, (Forthcoming).

Hurd, Michael, "The Joint Retirement Decision of Husbands and Wives," National

        Bureau of Economic Research, December 1988, Working Paper No. 2803.

Ishikawa, Tsuneo, "Chochiku: Kakei Chochiku no Kozo Yoin to Kinyu Zeisei,"

        in K. Hamada, I'l. Kuroda and A. Horuichi, eds., Nihon Keizai no Makuro

        Bunseki (Macroeconomic Analysis of the Japanese Economy, Tokyo, Tokyo

        University Press, 1987, pp. 177—210.

_____     and Kazuo Ueda, "The Bonus Payment System and Japanese Personal

        Savings," in Masahiko Aoki, ed., The Economic Analysis of the Japanese

        Firm, New York, North-Holland, 1984, pp. 133—92.

Killingsworth, Mark R., Labor Supply, New York: Cambridge University Press,
                                       -28-


     1983.

Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., "Intergenerational Transfers and Savings," Jourrialof

     Econc_PersctiveS, Spring 1988, vol. 2, pp. 41-58.

Leimer, Dean and Selig Lesnoy, "Social Security and Private Saving: New

     Time—Series Evidence." Journal of Political Economy, June 1982, vol. 90,

     PP. 606-29.

Lesnoy. Selig and Dean, Leimer, "Social Security and Private Savings:

     Theory and Historical Evidence," Social Security Bulletin, January

     1985, vol. 48, pp. 14—30.

Modigliani, Franco, "Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of

     Nations," American Economic Review, June 1986, Vol. 76, pp. 297—313.

       "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Saving

     in the Accumulation of Wealth,"

     Spring 1988, Vol. 2, pp. 15-40.

       and Arlie Sterling, "Determinants of Private Saving with Special

     Reference to the Role of Social Security —   Cross-country   Tests,"

     in Franco Modigliani and Richard Hemming, eds., The Determinants of

     National Saving and Wealth, New York, St. Martin's Press, 1983,

     pp. 24—55.

Moffitt, Robert A., "Life-Cycle Labor Supply and Social Security: A Time-

     Series Analysis," in Gary Burtless, ed., Work, Health, and Income

     among the Elderly, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1987,

     pp. 183-228.

Munnell, Alicia, "The Impact of Social Security on Personal Saving,"

     National Tax Journal, December 1974, vol. 21, pp. 553-67.
                                      — 29   -




Noguchi, Yukio, "Problems of Public Pensions in Japan." Hitotsubashi
     Journal of Economics, June 1983, Vol. 24, pp. 43—68.

Noland, Marcus, "Japanese Household Portfolio Allocation Behavior," Review    of
     Economics and Statistics, February 1988, vol. 70, pp. 135-9.

Ohrnae, Kenichi, "Saving Rates of Japan and the United States," Japan Economic

     Journal,   (Nippon Keizai Shinbun in Japanese), March 15, 1988.

Romer, Paul M .,"Comment," in Stanley Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomic Annual,

     1986, Cambridge. MIT Press, 1986. pp. 220-33.
Sasaki, Motohiko, and Toshiaki Tachibanaki, "Kouteki Nenkin Seido ga Sedai-

     betsu Chochiku-ritsu to Shisan Keisei ni Ataeta Eikyo," Shakai Hosho

     Kenkyu, Summer 1985, Vol. 21, pp. 59-71.

Sato. Kazuo. "The Wealth Target and Saving: Theory and Japanese Evidence,'

     Japan Economic Seminar. Discussion Paper, Columbia University, 1987.

Seike, Atsusi, "Nenkin no Shunyu Seigen to Rodo Kyokyu," Nihon Rodo Kyoka

     Zassi, September 1982, No. 282, pp. 14-24.

Shinohara. Miyobei. "The Determinants of Post-War Savings Behavior in Japan,"

     in Franco Modigliani and Richard Hemming, eds., The DeterminantsQf

     National Saving and Wealth, New York, St. Martin's Press. 1983,

     pp. 201-18.

Slade, Frederic P.,"Retirement Status and State Dependence: A Longitudinal

     Study of Older Men," Journal of Labor Economics, January 1987, vol. 5,

     pp. 90—105

Takayama, Noriyuki, "Japan," in Jean-Jacques Rosa, ed., The World Crisis in
     Social Security, Paris, Fondation National d'Economie Politique.

     1982, pp. 71-91.
                                                        Appendix

                                    The Reform of Employees Pension Insurance (EPI)
                                      and National Pension Insurance (NPI) in 1986



                                                                   EPI
                                  Before April 1986                                           After    April   1986

COVERAGE     *   Employees of private firms in commerce and              *   Employees   of private firms in commerce and
                 industry with 5 or more employees                           industry

             *   Firms less than five employees with voluntary           *   Non-corporations less than five employees with
                 coverage subject to approval                                voluntary coverage subject to approval




QUALIFYING   * Age   50   (men)                                          *   Age 65 (men)
CONDITIONS
             *            (women and miners)                             * Age 60 (women)
                 Age 55
                                                                             Gradual increase from 55 to 60 by the year 2000
             * 20 years contribution       (15 years under special
                 condition)                                              * Age 55 (miners and seamen)

             *   35 scales   of average standard remuneration            *   25 years   contribution

             *                                                           * 39 scales of      average standard remuneration
                 Age 60-64
                 Pension reduced 20% of labor earnings between
                 45 and 97 thousand yen a month                          * During   the transitional period
                 Pension reduced 50% of labor earnings between               Pension reduced 20% of labor earnings between    70
                 98 and 133 thousand yen a month                             and 95 thousand yen a month
                 Pension reduced 80% of labor earnings between               Pension reduced 50% of labor earnings between    95
                 134 and 159 thousand yen a month                            and 155 thousand yen a month
                 Pension reduced 100% of labor earnings beyond               Pension reduced 80% of labor earnings between    155
                 160 thousand yen a month                                    and 210 thousand yen a month
                                                                             Pension reduced 100% of labor earnings beyond    210
             * Age 65-                                                       thousand yen a montfl
                 Pension reduced 20% of labor earnings more than
                 160 thousand yen a month                        * Age 65-
                                                                   Pension reduced 20% of labor earnings more than 210
                                                                   thousand yen a month
                                              Appendix   (continued)

                                                             EPI
                              iat_ptii     1986                                        I! April1986
RETIREMENT
BENEF ITS    * = 2,050  yen x months of contribution               *   = Average standard remuneration per month
                  * 1.183 + average standard renuneration                * (10/1000 - 7.5/1000) x months of contri—
                  per month x 10/1000 x months of contri-                but ion.
                  bution x 1.183.                                        (Average standard remuneration is revalued
                  (The months of contribution are 240 months             average lifetime monthly earnings.)
                  for contribution periods less than 240                 (A 20-year phase-in period for part of
                  months and are 420 months for contribution             (10/1000 - 7.5/1000) during the transitionary
                  periods more than 420 months in the first              period)
                  part of equation before + sign)
                                                                   *   Dependents'  supplements; 15 thousand yen a
             *                                                         month for spouse up to age 65, 15 thousand yen
                 Dependents supplements: 15 thousand yen a
                 month for spouse, 5 thousand yen a month for          a month for each 1st and 2nd child, 5 thousand
                 each 1st and 2nd child, 2 thousand yen a              yen a month for additional children up to age 18
                 month for each other child up to age 18 or            or invalid child.
                 invalid child.                                         (50 thousand yen for spouse after age 65)

             *   Automatic cost—of-living adjustment   for         *   Automatic   cost—of—living   adjustment   for annual
                 consumer prices.                                      changes of 5% or more in consumer prices.



SOURCES      * 6.2%   (men since 1985)                             * 6.2%   (men)

             * 5.65% (women since 1985)                            * 5.6% (women)
                                                                     (Rate for women to increase gradually until it
             * 6.8% (miners since 1985)                              reaches the same level as that of men in 1993)

             * Same as for insured persons                         * 6.8% (miners)
                                             (employers)

             * 20% of benefit costs from the general               * Same as for insured persons       (employers)
               budget subsidy
                                                                   * A payment from the general budget for
                                                                     one-third the amount transferred from the         EN
                                                                     to the NPI
                                                     Appendix (concluded)

                                                                   NP I
                                   Before April   1!                                               After   pril   1986

             *                                                            *     All  adult residents in Japan, regardless of
COVERAGE         All   residents    in Japan aged 20-59
                                                                                nationality, ages 20-59
             *
                 Except for the insured by other programs
                 and those spouses                                        * Option available for aged 60-64

                                                                          *     Option available for Japanese nationality
                                                                                aged 20-64 in foreign countries

             * Age 65                                                     * Age 65
QUALIFYING
CONDITIONS
             * 25 years (a sum of contribution and exemption              * 25     years (a sum of contribution and exemption
               periods)                                                         periods)
               (A reduction in qualifying period subject to                     (a reduction in qualifying period subject to
               a birth date)                                                    a birth date)

             *   Pension payable between age 60—70 with actual            * Pension payable age 60-70. same as before
                 deductions and increases by law 26, clause 2.              April 1986 by the law.
                 Deductions 60(48%), 51(35%), 62(28%), 63(20%)
                 and 64(11%).
                 Increases 66(12%), 61(26%), 68(43%), 69(64%)
                 and 70(88%).

RfINJ        *     1680 yen x months of contribution x 1.183              * 50 thousand yen a month
B2IEFITS           + 1,680 yen x months of exemption x 1/3
                   x 1.183).                                              *                       who contributes       less than 480
                                                                                Beneficiary
                   (There is a special benefits calculation                     montfls
                   fo, L.eneficiary who contributes for a short                 (600 thousand yen x (months of contribution
                                                                                + months of exemption x 1/3) + 480 months)
                   period)

             *   Automatic                        adjustment for          *     Automatic cost—of-living adjustment for
                             cost-of-living
                 consumer prices,                                               annual changes of 5% or more in consumer
                                                                                prices.

             *                                                              *   6,800     yen a month      (a gradual    increase in
SOURcES          6,740   yen a month
                                                                                every     year)
             *   the general budget subsidy amounting to
                 1/3 of benefit costs.                                    * The general budget subsidy equal to 1/3 of
                                                                            NPI benefit cost less transfer EPI.
                                                          Table    1


                               Coverage and Beneficiary of Public Welfare Pension            in   Japan
                                                         (thousands)


                                           1977                        1981                        1984 ______            1986
                                  Member   Beneficiary   Member        Beneficiary   Member        Beneficiary   Member   Beneficiary


                                  23,841      2,803       25,239          4,618      26,363           6,141      27,068      7,246

NP!                               26,469      8,812      21,596          10,417      25,727         10,805       25,090     11,313

Government employees               4,962      1,025        5,165          1,391           5,184       1,533       5,076      2,167

Agricultural and fishery
cooperative associations             444          54         473              86           485            128       488        152

Private school teachers              270          18         310              37            334            57       346         69

Seamen                               237          60         205              86            185           114       166        138


Source:   Health and Welfare White Paper, 1977-1987 (Kosei Hakusho        in Japanese),    Ministry of Health and Welfare, Tokyo,
          Japan.

          The figures of government employees include local and national government employees.
                                                       Table 2-1

                flegression Results of the I•pact of Social Security on Personal Saving and
                                   Labor Retirement of the Elderly (2SLS)




Independent                    Model I     5511 (2SLS)       Model II 550 (2SLS)       Model III 551 (25L5)
     Variable                Saving        Labor Forte      Saving    Labor Force      Saving    Labor Force


                               -—             - 264b          -—           .252D            -_            2770
Saving
                                            (—2.37)                       (—2.36)                      (-2.49)
Labor force                   - . 47                         - 445C          --            - .392        --

                            (—1.89)                         (—1.73)                    (—1.55)

Disposable income             -.016            .004           —.012          .007          - .032         .022
                             (—.40)           (.20)          (—.28)         (.34)          (-.53)        (.58)
55                              .037E_1t       .OO1E-1         .o29E—1       .005E—3         .022       - .021E-'.
                             (2.06)           (.14)          (1.77)         (.005)         (1.47)       (—.21)

55 * Dj                                                                                    ..,011b       —056E-1
                            (—3.72)         (—2.25)         (—3.37)       (-2.21)      (—2.53)         (—1.70)

55 * 02                                       -.0l8E—jb                     016Ejb         .035a
                             (—4.80)        (—2.58)         (—4.56)       (—2.62)      (—4.00)         (-3.87)

03                            9.720E,l        2.291E+lb       9.675E+1a 2.403E*lb          1.ogsE.21    4.126E.1
                              (4.60)         (2.32)          (4.41)        (2.37)          (4.04)       (4.26)

04                            2.233E+la       9.164t          2.o3sE+la     9.I56c         l.664E+lc    7.620
                              (3.26)         (1.88)          (2.91)        (1.83)          (2.06)       (1.27)


Life                         -2033b          -1322b          -1997b                                     1522b
                            (—2.31)         (—2.42)         (—2.21)       (-2.44)      (-2.31)         (—2.77)

Financial Assets              -.034           -.186            .OOBE-1      - .187          — .004      - .124
                              (—.12)        (—1.05)           (.003)      (—1.06)          (—.014)      (—.69)



                                                                             (continued)
                                        Table 2-i (concluded)




Independent                Model I SSI1 (2SLS)      Model II 550 (2515)       Model III SST (ZSLS
Variable                  Saving     Labor Force   Saving    Labor Force     Saving    Labor Force


Education                   .371         .380         .295        .363          .205        .148
                          (1.04)       (1.55)        (.62)      (1.48)         (.51)       L54
Housing                                 --         -2.4S9
                         (—2.88)                   (—2.73)                   (—2.29)

Retained earnings           •583b        --           •556b       -—            .460C
                          (2.43)                    (2.31)                    (1.88)
Female                      ——
                                          523a        ——
                                                                   532a                      642a
labor force                            (3.06)                   (3.12)                    (3.10)

Agriculture                 —-          -.063         --         -.056          --        -.008
                                       (—.21)                   (—.18)                    (—.02)

Intercept                  7.335E+lb   7.478E+i     1.035E,lb    7.435E,Ia    6.S3SE.lb   7.210Ei
                          (2.71)       (4.48)       (2.54)      (7.45)        (2.40)      (4.15)

R2                         0.93        0.96         0.93        0.98          0.92        0.98

D.W.                       2.27         2.34         2.20        2.34          2.14        2.37

S.E.                       1.19          .79         1.21         .79         1.28          .30




a Indicates statistical significance at the 1* level.
b Indicates statistical significance at the 5* level.
c Indicates statistical significance at the 10* level.

Mote: t-statistics   are in parentheses below the estimated coefficient.
       D.W. is the   Durbin—blatson statistics and first-order serial
       correlation   is corrected by Beach and Mckinnon method.
       S.E. is the   standard error of the regression.
                                    Table 2-2

Regression Results of the Impact of Social Security on Personal Saving
                and Labor Retirement of the Elderly (2SLS)




Independent              Model I SSAB (2SLS)        Model U SSAC (2SLS)
  Variable             Saving    Labor Force       Saving      Labor Force


Saving
                          ——
                                       —•475a                     - . 698a
                                      (—3.20)                   (—5.01)

Labor force              - . 610b                   - 489C
                       (—2.25)                     (—2.06)

Disposable income        - •Ø49b       - .0360      - ,067a       —.065
                       (—2.10)        (—2.45)      (—3.00)      (—5.17)

ss                        .osoE—la       .086E-1       038a         064a
                        (3.27)         (3.97)       (3.95)       (5.50)

5 * Dl                    .O11E—l                   —.079E—1
                         (.74)        (—1.91)      (—1.25)      (—4.34)

55 * 02                  —.079E_lb                   -•058a       ._091a
                       (—2.11)     (—2.97)         (—3.37)      (-4.41)
03                       7.243E+lb     7.000E+10    9.5o7E+1      1089E÷2a
                        (2.26)         (2.80)       (3.38)       (4.21)

04                      -6.760         1.263E+1     3.695         2.293E+la
                        (—.99)         (1.69)        (.73)       (4.03)


Life                    —2.26$        —1362b       ..2157b       ..2128a
                       (—2.38)        (—2.29)      (—2.48)      (—4.22)

Financial Assets          .ioo         -.530b        -.036        -•421b
                         (.29)        (—2.11)       (—.11)      (—2.43)


                                                                 (continued)
                            Table 2-2 (concluded)



Independent                Model I SSAB (2SLS)       Model II SSAC (2SLS)
Variable                  Saving    Labor Force     Saving    Labor Force


Education                   .044         .259         .212        •65b
                           (.11)        (.87)        (.12)      (2.12)

Housing                     .173                     -.404
                           (.21)                    (—.56)

Retained earnings           .016        ——
                                                      .222       —-
                           (.08)                    (1.13)

Female                      ——
                                         732a                      850a
labor force                            (3.61)                   (4.99)
                            ——
Agriculture                            1664b                    1966a
                                       (2.47)                   (3.49)

Intercept                  9.275E+la   3.813E÷lc    8.664E÷la   4.586E÷lb
                          (3.36)       (1.87)       (3.37)      (2.61)

R2                         0.91        0.98         0.93        0.99

O.W.                       1.86        1.88          2.03        2.37

S.E.                       1.39         .91         1.22         .13



a Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level.
b Indicates statistical significance at the 5% level.
c Indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

Note: t-statistics   are in parentheses below the estimated coefficient.
       D.W. is the   Durbin-Watson statistics and first-order serial
       correlation   is corrected by Beach and McKinnon method.
       S.E. is the   standard error of the regression.
                                                 Table 2—3



   Author              Time Period        Estimation Method        Data Source       Estimated Coefficient

Noguchi   (1983)       1968 - 1980        OLS                   Family Saving             —.010 - —.148
                          (Japan)         expected present      Survey and Family
                                          value of gross        Income Expenditure
                                          future benefit        Survey (Japan)

Sasaki and             1965 - 1982        OLS                                             —.14   -   -.291
                                                                Family Saving
Tachibanaki   (1985)      (Japan)         expected present      Survey and Family
                                          value of future       Income Expenditure
                                          benefit               Survey (Japan)

Feldstein (1980)       Average value      TSLS and OLS          National Accounts         —.21 -     - .37
                       over 1969 - 1976   benefit—earnings      of OECD Countries,
                       (12 OECD coun-     replacement ratio     Yearbook of National
                       tries)                                   Account Statistics.
                                                                Demographic Yearbook
                                                                and Year Book of
                                                                Labor Statistics
                                                                (OECD)

Graham (1987)          Average value      2SLS and OLS          Demographic Trends,
                                                                                          - .02 -    .09
                       over 1910 - 1980   social security       Labor Force Statistics,
                       or 1975 (24 OECD   pension benefit per   National Accounts, and
                       countries)         person divided by     Others (OECD).
                                          per capita income

Hunnell (1974)         1929 - 1971        OLS                   Economic Report of the   -.03 - —.117
                       (U.S.A.)           gross social          President, Long Term
                                          security wealth       Economic Growth, Manpower
                                          and net social        Report of the President
                                          security wealth       and others (U.S.A.)

Bernheim (1987)        1969               Two Stage Method      Longitudinal Retirement   -.7 - —1.37
                       (U.S.A.)           capitalized value     History Survey (U.S.A.)
                                          of future benefits
                                          for actuarial and
                                          simple valuation
                                    Table 3

                          Definitions of Variables


Variable
  Name                                Definition


Saving            average personal saving rate.
                              =   17.006,    a =   3.115)
Labor force       labor force participation rate of males aged 60 and
                  over.
                              =   66.898, a = 5.210)

Social security   SSN is the capitalized value of future net benefits
wealth            in 1,000 yen, based on OASDI program (old-age,
                  survivors and disability insurance under the welfare
                  pension program).   (See footnote 7).
                         (j.z 12141.8, a   7487.11)

                  SSG is the capitalized value of future gross benefits
                  in 1,000 yen, based on OASDI program (old-age, sur-
                  vivors and disability insurance under the welfare
                  pension program). (See footnote 7).
                              =   14409.2.   a =   8707.04)
                  SST is the capitalized value of social security tax
                  contribution in 1,000 yen, based on OASDI program
                  (old-age, survivors and disability insurance under
                  the welfare pension program). (See footnote 7).
                              =   2267.47, a = 1223.18)

                  SSAB is the accumulated past real social security
                  retirement benefits (adjusted for the price level)
                  and discounted future real social security retirement
                  benefits using a current real discount rate, in
                  1,000 yen, as of 1975.
                         (s.' = 4943.41, a = 2510.23)



                  SSAC is the accumulated past real social security tax
                  contribution (adjusted for the price level) and dis-
                  counted future real social security tax contribut'cn
                  using a current real discount rate, in 1,000 yen,
                  as of 1975.
                        (p = 944.428, a = 573.506)
                           Table 3 (concluded)



Variable
  Name                               Definition



Oisposable income    real per capita personal disposable income, in 1,000
                     yen
                           (u = 614.423, a = 333.501)

Life                 remaining life expectancy at male age of sixty.
                              = 16.198, a = 1.363)

Financial assets     average personal net liquidity wealth rate: stocks,
                     bonds, trusts and life insurance at the beginning
                     of year.
                              = 6.411, a = 2.071)

Education            ratio of the number of graduates from junior college,
                     senior college and university to people who completed
                     at least the nine-year compulsory education of elemen-
                     tary school and junior high school.
                           (it =   17.117,   a =   11.102)

Housing              average personal expenditure rate of personal
                     residential construction in private sector, at
                     the beginning of year.
                              = 7.663, a = 2.501)

Retained earnings    average rate of corporate retained earnings.
                            (j.s = 6.411, a = 2.071)
Female labor force   labor force participation rate of females aged 60
                     and over.
                           (p = 30.863. a = 4.067)

Agriculture          ratio of the number of male workers in agriculture
                     and forestry to total workers.
                            (p = 10.778, a = 5.424)




Note: The sources are listed in Table 4. The symbols pi and a denote mean
       and standard deviation, respectively.
                                    Table 4

                                 Sources of Data

Saving

    Saving (1951—1982): "Economic Statistics Annual," 1960—1988,
    Bank of Japan.
    "White Paper of National Income," 1930—1960, and "Annual Report on
    National Account' (the latest name), 1951-1988, Economic
                                                              Planning Agency.
Labor Force Participation Rate

    Labor force participation rate (1951—1982): "Labor Force Survey,"
    1950—1983, Statistics Bureau, Prime Minister's Office, Department of
    Statistical Information in Ministry of Labor, and Department of
    Population Census in Prime Minister's Office.

Social Security

    Social Security retirement benefits (1951-1983): "Social Insurance
    Agency Annual Report," 1965-1983, Social Insurance Agency, Japanese
    Government,
    Social Security tax (1951—1983): "Social Insurance Agency Annual Report."
    1965-1983, Social Insurance Agency, Japanese Government.
    Mr. Matsue in Sun Chosa Shitsu of Social Insurance Agency, Japanese
    Government.

Income

    Personal income (1951—1982): "Annual Report on National Account"
    (the latest name), 1951-1988, Economic Planning Agency.
    "White Paper of National Income," 1930—1960. Economic Planning Agency.
    "Economic Statistics Annual," 1965, Bank of Japan.

Taxes

    Income tax (1951—1982): "Annual Report on National Account (the latest
    name), 1951-1988, Economic Planning Agency.
    "White Paper of National Income," 1930—1960, Economic Planning Agency.
    "Economic Statistics Annual," 1965, Bank of Japan.

Price Index

   Consumer price index (1951—1982): "Economic Statistics Annual,"
   1960-1988, Bank of Japan, and Oepartment of Statistical Consultation
   in Bank of Japan.
   GNP deflator (1951-1983): "Economic Statistics Annual," 1960—1988, Bank
   of Japan, and Department of Statistical Consultation in Bank of Japan.
                                   Table 4

                           Sources of Data (continued)


Population

    Population (1951—1983): "Vital Statistics of Japan," 1960—
    1983, Ministry of Health and Welfare.

Life Expectancy

    Life Expectancy (1951-1983): "Life Table," 1935—1983,
    Japanese Insurance Organization.

Interest Rate

    Market and discount rates, and yield of 10 years long term bond
    (1951-1983): "Economic Statistics Annual," 1960-1988, Bank of Japan,
    and Department of Statistical Consultation in Bank of Japan.

Retained Earnings

    Retained earnings (1951—1983): "Economic Statistics Annual,"
    1960-1988, Bank of Japan.
    "White Paper of National Income," 1930-1960, and "Annual Report on
    National Account" (the latest name). 1951-1988, Economic Planning Agency.
    Messrs. Ikoma and Kisaichi in the Department of Statistics and Income
    in Economic Planning Agency.

Agriculture and Forestry

    "Labor Force Survey." (1951—1983), Statistics Bureau, Prime Minister's
    Office, and Messrs. Ando and Yokomizo in Department of Labor Force
    Statistics in Statistics Bureau, Prime Minister's Office.

Education

    Education 1951-1982: "Educational Statistical Survey," 1980—1983.
    Department of Education.

Wealth, Physical Assets, and Liquidity Assets

    "Economic Statistics Annual," 1950, 1955 and 1960—1988, Bank of Japan.
    "Annual Report on National Accounts" (the latest name), 1951-1988,
    Economic Planning Agency. Mr. Iwamura in the Bank of Japan in New York
    Office.
    Mr. Ikoma in Department of Income Statistics in Economic Planning Agency.
                                                     table   5

                     Value of Dependent Variables and Social Security Benefits Variables
                         Thousands of Constant (1975) Yen (except for columns of %)



                                           Labor force
        Disposable   Personal     S/YD    participation
Year   income (to)   saving(S)      t                        SSN        SSG        SST         SSAB         SSAT


1951    132.299       22.991     17.378     66.030         2446.88     3010.84     563.955     203.188     35.644
1952    182.494       19.385     10.622     68.520         2805.85     3452.55     646.691     563.080     70.168
1953    194.582       13.411      6.892     73.500         3052.43     3755.95     703.524     811.247     97.558
1954    203.371       18.096      8.898     72.880         3189.06     3924.07     735.009    1082.10     137.553
1955    227.748       29.723     13.051     74.990         3858.47     4693.10     834.634    1459.03     194.360
1956    244.300       31.965     13.084     74.120         4164.37     6065.17     900.804    1850.50     253.672
1967    262.788       39.719     15.115     73.750         4485.56     5455.82     970.282   2187.24      306.475
1958    277.072       40.075     14.464     74.250         4748.39     5775.55    1027.13     2625.81     375.721
1959    302.611       49.095     16.224     69.890         5179.46     6299.86   1120.39     3038.67      439.659
1960    333.974       59,084     17.691     70.880          5827.25    7075.32    1248.06     3391.48     509.995
1961    369.583       72.186     19.532     71.380         6428.33     7805.08   1376.79     3685.48      576.762
1962    392.328       70.721     18.026     72.130         7022.63     8500.42    1477.80     3894.49     634.327
1963    416.693       74.488     17.876     69.400         7757.11     9343.60   1586.50     4054.61      683.838
1964    452.481       81.297     17.967     69.300         8516.21    10243.9     1727.63     4337.75     755.998
1965    508.927       80.250     15.769     69.550         9059.18    10916.8    1857.65     4726.46      840.863
1966    548.482       82.552     15.051     69.250        10060.2     12066.8    2006.58      5151.95     942.418
1967    603.776       94.115     15.588     68.200        11254.3     13467.7    2213.41     5627.20     1057.10
1968    656.805      109.565     16.682     67.000        12319.8     14729.5    2409.63     6004.88     1156.35
1969    716.471      124.038     17.313     66.750        13499.9     16129.1    2629.22     6544.12     1263.16
1970    769.006      140.195     18.231     65.450        14430.6     17251.6    2821.07     6885.90     1355.81
1971    806.058      144.685     17.950     64.700        15738.5     18704.5    2966.05     7318.89     1470.00
1972    874.136      159.384     18.233     63.600        17359,6     20578.8    3219.17     7829.30     1612.77
1973    965.841      201.924     20.907     63.850        19350.0     22910.6    3560.60     8134.26     1652.00
1974    962.092      228.219     23.121     62.950        19518.1     23069.6    3551.57     7472.73     1522.96
1975    962.744      212.920     22.116     61.900        19885.6     23445.1    3559.41     7798.90     1586.81
1976    985.025      220.597     22.395     61.550        20608.5     24255.8    3647.31     7573.20     1544.00
1977   1003.72       218.434     21.763     60.350        21017.7     24673.0    3655.32     7382.47     1516.43
1978   1042.78       216.717     20.783     59.950        22110.6     25919.3    3808.77     7452.92     1539.92
1919   1064.97       193.321     18.153     59.100        22956.7     26864.3    3907.74     7497.62     1557.54
1980   1058.07       189.446     17.905     59.400        22824.5     26748.4    3923.90     7216.39     1506.99
1981   1063.27       194.513     18.294     58.750        23243.1     27168.9    3925.81     7130.32     1501.65
1982   1077.04       177.923     16.520     57.400        23818.4     27794.3    3975.89     7116.80     1523.22
                             Table 5 (concluded)


SOURCES

Personal income: "Annual Report on National Account" (the latest name),
1951-1988, Economic Planning Agency.

Saving: "Annual Report on National Account" (the latest name), 1951—1988,
Economic Planning Agency,

Labor force participation rate: "Labor Force Survey," 1950—1983, Statistics
Bureau, Prime Minister's Office, Department of Statistical Information in
Ministry of Labor, and Department of Population Census in Prime Minister's
Office.

Social Security retirement benefits: "Social Insurance Agency Annual Report,"
1965-1983, Social Insurance Agency, Japanese Government.
Social Security tax: "Social Insurance Agency Annual Report," 1965-1983,
Social Insurance Agency, Japanese Government.
Mr. Matsue in Sun Chosa Shitsu of Social Insurance Agency, Japanese
Government.
