                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                 IS THE GASOLINE TAX REGRESSIVE?




                         James M. Poterba




                      Working Paper No. 3578




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1990




  am grateful to the National Science Foundation, the MIT Center
for Energy Policy Research, and the John M. Olin Foundation for
research support. I received helpful comments from David
Bradford, Alan Krueger, Marc Robinson, Daniel Slesnick, and
Robert Stavjns. I am especially grateful to Hilary Sigman for
outstanding research assistance and helpful discussions. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation.
                                                       Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3578
                                         January 1991
                  IS THE GASOLINE TAX REGRESSIVE?

                             ABSTRACT
     Claims of the regressivity of gasoline taxes typically rely
on annual surveys of consumer income and expenditures which show
that gasoline expenditures are a larger fraction of income for
very low income households than for middle or high—income

households. This paper argues that annual expenditure provides a
more reliable indicator of household well—being than annual
income. It uses data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey to re-

assess the claim that gasoline taxes are regressive by computing
the share of total expenditures which high-spending and low-
spending households devote to retail gasoline purchases. This
alternative approach shows that low—expenditure households devote

a smaller share of their budget to gasoline than do their
counterparts in the middle of the expenditure distribution.

Although households in the top five percent of the total spending
distribution spend less on gasoline than those who are less well-
off, the share of expenditure devoted to gasoline is much more
stable across the population than the ratio of gasoline outlays
to current income. The gasoline tax thus appears far less
regressive than conventional analyses suggest.

                                        James M. Poterba
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Massachusetts Institute
                                          of Technology
                                        Cambridge, MA 02139
                                 1

     The long—standing view that excise taxes such as the gaso-
line tax are regressive, imposing a heavier burden on low—income
households than on their higher—income counterparts, played a
central role in shaping the 1990 budget compromise. This issue
is certain to be debated again, since these taxes are frequently
considered as a means to achieve environmental, budgetary, and

national security objectives (see Congressional Budget Office
(1986)). Claims of the regressivity of excise taxes typically
rely on annual surveys of consumer income and expenditures which

show that gasoline expenditures are a larger fraction of income
for very low income households than for middle or high—income
households (see for example KPMG Peat Marwick (1990)). Several
recent studies, however, notably Kasten and Sammartino (1988) and
Poterba (1989), suggest that year—to-year fluctuations in income
among households at the bottom of the annual income distribution

may exaggerate the regressivity of excise taxes. From a life—
cycle perspective, these taxes, particularly the gasoline tax,
are much less regressive than is commonly believed.

     This paper argues that annual expenditure provides a more
reliable indicator of household well—being than annual income.
Whether a given tax is regressive should therefore be analyzed by

testing whether it places higher burden on low-expenditure
households than on their high—expenditure counterparts.   My
empirical analysis uses data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey
to compute the share of total expenditures which high-spending

and low—spending households devote to retail gasoline purchases.
                                 2

This alternative approach to measuring the distributional burden
of gasoline taxes yields results which are strikingly different
from those using the traditional approach based on annual income.

     Low—expenditure households devote a smaller share of their
budget to gasoline than do their counterparts in the middle of

the expenditure distribution. Although households in the top
five percent of the total spending distribution spend signifi—
cantly less on gasoline (as a share of expenditures) than those

who are less well—off, gasoline's expenditure share is much more
stable across the population than the ratio of gasoline outlays
to current income. The reduced estimate of gasoline tax regres—
sivity is not an inherent feature of using expenditures rather
than income as a basis for assessing incidence. Some other

energy expenditures, such as electricity, exhibit different

cross—sectional patterns with much higher expenditure shares for
low rather than high income households.

     This study underscores a conclusion of the recent Congres—
sional Budget Office (1990) excise tax study: "measured as a
percentage of total expenditures, ...   outlays   on these goods
[subject to excise taxes] tend to be more equal [than outlays as

a share of income] across family income classes. (p.xviii) ."
However, this paper moves beyond the CBO study, which focuses on
gasoline's share of total outlays for households in different
income categories. If lifetime income is better proxied by total
expenditures than by current income, a more complete procedure
                                3

involves ranking households by expenditures rather than income,
and considering the resulting distribution of budget shares.
     This paper is divided into five sections. The first pre—
sents summary statistics on the patterns of gasoline expenditure
as a share of income and total expenditure, motivating subsequent

analysis of what explains the differences between these incidence
measures. It also considers the variation in expenditure pat-

terns within income or expenditure categories, to provide some
evidence on the horizontal equity of gasoline tax changes. This
study focuses exclusively on household gasoline consumption,
assuming that neither deisel fuel nor intermediate uses of
gasoline are taxed.

    Section two explores the characteristics of households who
fare relatively better in the expenditure than in the income

distribution. Nearly forty percent of these households are
either elderly or very young, suggesting that divergence between
income and outlays may reflect long—term economic planning.

Another significant group is experiencing economic hardship, such
as unemploy—ment or disability; in some cases these circumstances
may be short term.

     Section three examines the role of indexed transfer payments
in offsetting tax—induced increases in gasoline prices for some

households, particularly those near the bottom of the income and
expenditure distributions. Low-income and low—expenditure
households are much more likely to receive indexed transfers than

are better-off households; nearly two thirds of the income
                                4


received by households in the lowest expenditure decile is
indexed. These programs blunt the regressivity of excise taxes
by automatically increasing household receipts in response to
consumer price increases.

    Section four considers the efficiency cost of the gasoline
tax in light of other government policies such as Corporate
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards which affect the complexion
of the U.S. auto fleet. If the CAFE standards bind both before
and after a gasoline tax increase, the efficiency cost of such a
change is significantly smaller than estimates which ignore this
constraint would suggest. Finally, a brief conclusion suggests
several extensions of this work, both for analyzing the burden of
motor fuel taxes and for examining excise taxes more generally.
                                5

1 Who Buys Gasoline? Income vs. Expenditure Incidence Results
     The annual income distribution is unstable from year to
year. In the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics, for example, a
randomly chosen individual had only a 41% chance of being in the
same income quintile in 1971 and l978. There was somewhat less
mobility out of the bottom quintile, where 54% remained in both
surveys, than other quintiles. Since households move across
income categories, categorizing them as well—to—do or poor based
on annual income data provides a noisy measure of long-term
economic status.2 Even modest mobility is sufficient to alter
basic results on the distributional burden of taxes, particularly

excise taxes. In Canadian data, Davies, St. Hilaire, and Whalley
(1984) find that the average burden of sales and excise taxes for
the lowest income decile, while 27% of annual income, is only 15%
of lifetime income.3 In their study, the average burden of
excise taxes across all income groups is 13%, so the lifetime
income calculation suggests much less excise tax regressivity
than annual income data.   For the highest income decile, the




     LPoterba (1989) reports further details on income mobility
in the PSID, as well as other data sets which permit some analy-
sis of income fluctuations.

     2Some earlier incidence studies [for example, Pechman
(1985)] exclude very low income households precisely because
their annual income may be a noisy measure of permanent income.
     3Lifetime income is the present discounted value of a
household's income throughout the lifetime. It is difficult to
measure exante, but can be estimated using data on the stochas-
tic properties of household income from year to year.
                                6

burden of excise taxes rises from 8.5% of annual income to 12.4%

of lifetime income.
     Focusing on lifetime income introduces two considerations

which are absent in incidence computations based on annual

income. First, there are predictable life-cycle patterns in
earnings, asset accumulation, and consumption. Elderly house-
holds, for example, may spend more than their current income by
drawing down assets. Their low annual income may provide a poor
indicator of their economic status. Second, lifetime income is
effectively a multi—year average of annual income. It is less
sensitive to variation in a given year's earnings due to un-

employment, changes in family status, or other transitory cir-
cumstances.
    The notion that households behave on the basis of long-term
income underlies the life—cycle and and permanent—income theories
of consumption. These theories, which are the foundation for
most modern analyses of household consumption behavior, imply
that a household's total expenditures may be a more reliable
indicator of economic well-being than the same household's annual
income.4 This insight provides the theoretical rationale for the
empirical analysis which follows. Even if consumption is not set
precisely in accordance with the permanent income hypothesis, for


     4A recent study by Carroll and Summers (1989) shows that
within cohorts, occupations, and other broad groups, average
consumption tracks average income over the lifecycle. This casts
doubt on the broad proposition that households save for retire-
ment, but does not imply that for a given household, current
income and current consumption move in tandem.
                                     7

most households it is likely to reflect at least some forward-
and backward—looking behavior, therefore offsetting some of the
transitory noise in annual income.5

       Similar arguments play an important part in the ongoing
debate on whether income or consumption is a more appropriate tax
base. If consumption is a better measure of a household's
taxable capacity than its current income, then studies of the tax
burden ——     regardless   of whether that burden is comprised of
income or consumption taxes —— should use a measure of consump-
tion to estimate a household's ability to pay.        At a minimum,

consumption outlays provide an interesting alternative perspec-
tive on the distribution of the tax burden across households.


1.1 Data and Sample
       Data on income and expenditure patterns are drawn from the
1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey, a stratified national sample of
approximately two thousand households. Households are inter-
viewed four times during their CES experience, and at any moment,
nearly five thousand households are taking part in the Consumer

Expenditure Survey. My data sample includes only 1582 households
——   all   those whose first expenditure interview occurred during
the first or second quarter of 1985 (a total of 2608 households),


     5me KPMG Peat Marwick (1990) study of excise tax regres-
sivity acknowledges the potential limitations of basing regres-
sivity calculations on annual income data, but argues that
solving this problem requires many years of income data to
compute permanent income. However, total consumption can provide
information on long—run income even in a single cross section.
                                8

who reported four consecutive quarterly expenditure interviews (a
subsample of 1889 households), and with complete data on house-
hold income (a subset of 1582 households).6
     Household income is defined as the average of pre—tax income
reported in the first and last quarterly interview. In each of
these interviews, households are asked about their income over

the previous twelve months. This income measure, while a stan-
dard basis for assessing household economic status, is imperfect
for two reasons. First, while it includes cash transfer payments
such as Social Security or welfare, it excludes in—kind transfers
such as Food Stamps or Medicaid. Valuing such transfers is
difficult, but assuming a value of zero systematically under-
states the income of some poverty households. Second, the income
measure does not reflect tax payments. This is due to data
difficulties: the incomplete reporting of tax payments and the
asynchronous nature of the tax data (last calendar year) and
income data (current calendar year) in the Consumer Expenditure

Survey.7
     Total expenditures are the sum of total expenditures in each
of the four interview quarters, excluding any outlays for new or
used automobiles. The expenditure total includes the CES es—


     6Households with incomplete income data failed to respond
completely to income questions in at least one interview. This
nonresponse pattern may be correlated with household economic
status, and might bias the distributional estimates in later
sections.

     7me sample includes some households with negative incomes,
some due to business losses and some to other factors.
                                9

timate of the rental equivalent value of owner—occupied housing
services for homeowners, as well as rental outlays for households
who do not own homes.8   Auto purchases are excluded to avoid

spurious volatility in the expenditures measure, since this
purchase can be a large fraction of all other outlays in a given
year. The robustness of the findings to this assumption is
explored in later sections.

    Using both income and expenditure measures, households are
assigned to deciles of the income or spending distribution.9

Summary statistics, principally averages of expenditure shares or
expenditure—to—income ratios within each decile, are then com-
puted to illustrate the distribution of gasoline expenditure

patterns. Throughout the analysis, gasoline expenditures are the
sum of household outlays for gasoline and motor oil. This study
does not attempt to analyze the distribution of indirect gasoline
tax expenditures, i.e., the taxes that may be collected from the
retail distribution sector but eventually passed on to consumers.




     81n tabulations of expenditure ranking published by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, expenditures are defined to include
outlays for cars and only the mortgage interest component of
homeowner costs. Some of the rankings in this paper may there-
fore differ from other published reports based on the same data.

     9The ranking does not correct for household size using an
equivalence scale from applied demand analysis. Future work
should explore this issue.
                               10

1.2 Income— versus Expenditure—Based Incidence
    Table 1 presents information on the usual measure of the

distribution of gasoline expenditures: the ratio of these expen-
ditures to income for households in different deciles of the pre-
tax income distributionJ° The table shows that low-income

households display markedly higher expenditure—to-income ratios
than higher—income households. For the entire bottom income

decile, this ratio is more than 11%; even for households between

the fifth and tenth percentile of the income distribution,
gasoline outlays average 6.7% of pretax income. The table shows
a relatively smooth decline in the share of income devoted to
gasoline, to 4.7% at the sixth decline and only 2.4% in the
highest income decile. Evidence like that in Table 1 is fre-
quently invoked to support the regressivity of excise taxes on
gasoline.11 Even ignoring the very bottom of the reported income
distribution as noise, the results suggest that low—income
households spend between two and three times as much of their
income on gasoline as higher—income households.
     An alternative perspective is provided in Table 2, which
shows the fraction of expenditures devoted to gasoline for

households grouped by total expenditures. When total expendi-



     10Each entry shows the average ratio of gasoline outlays to
pretax income for households in the decile.

     11The recent Congressional Budget Office (1990) study
focuses primarily on tax burdens relative to household income.
It does present, however, some results using the total expendi-
ture ranking employed in Table 2.
                               11

tures exclude auto purchases and include imputed homeowner rent,
consumers in the lowest expenditure decile devote 3.9% of their
budgets to gasoline, compared with 5.6% for those in the fifth

and sixth deciles. The highest expenditure decile devotes 3.4%
of total outlays to gasoline, and if one focuses on the very top
of the expenditure distribution, outlays are an even smaller
budget share. For households with very high expenditure, those
in the top 2.5% of the expenditure distribution, the budget share
for gasoline is 3.0%, not significantly lower than the average
for households in the highest decile.
     The second and third columns of Table 2 consider alternative
definitions of household expenditures, but yield similar con-
clusions on gasoline expenditure patterns. The second column
includes outlays for automobiles in the expenditure total; this
does not alter the pattern of higher gasoline shraes in the
middle than at either extreme of the outlay distribution.
Because the expenditure total is larger, however, the gasoline
share declines in all outlay categories. The average share
across all households falls from 5.1% to 4.8%. The last column
excludes both imputed homeowner rent and auto purchases from the
expenditure. In this case the expenditure shares for the top and
bottom expenditure deciles are identical. The average gasoline
share in this case rises to 6.2%.
    Figure 1 graphs the income and expenditure shares for gaso-
line, combining the information in Tables 1 and 2. The figure
highlights two findings. First, the distributional pattern of
                                   12

gasoline expenditures is distinctly different in the two cases.
Households in the middle of the expenditure distribution devote

the largest budget share to gasoline, with levels nearly twice
that of households with very high or very low expenditures.

Rather than suggesting that gasoline taxes are regressive, the

expenditure—based calculations suggest that gasoline excise taxes
fall most heavily on middle-class households. Second, the figure
shows that the variation in expenditure shares across deciles is
much smaller than the variation in gasoline outlays as a share of
income. The intergroup inequities associated with the gasoline
excise tax are thus much smaller when the calibration is based on
expenditure rather than pre—tax income.

     The average income and expenditure shares presented above do
not address the heterogeneity of households within each decile.
Some argue that excise taxes fall unequally on different house-
holds with similar tax—paying capacity because of differences in
their expenditure patterns. Table 3 presents data on the frac-
tion of households in each expenditure decile with no gasoline
expenditures, as well as the share with expenditures which make

up more than ten percent of the household budget (roughly twice
the average expenditure share) .    Only 14% of the households in
the lowest expenditure decile devote more than ten percent of
their budget to gasoline, while more than one third do not report
    direct   gasoline purchases. The share of households with
either type of outlying expenditure pattern declines as one moves
up the expenditure distribution. By the sixth decile, for
                               13

example, fewer than two percent of the households report no

gasoline purchases 9.4% report outlays equal to more than ten
percent of their budget. None of the households in the top

expenditure decile reported either type of extreme outlay pat-
tern.

    Households with no gasoline outlays, presumably city—dwellers
who use public transportation, are heavily concentrated at the
bottom of the expenditure distribution. Many of these households
would actually be made better off by a gasoline tax, since they
would not face higher outlays but would receive higher benefits
as a result of cost—of—living increases in transfer payments.
    The households who would be most heavily burdened by the tax
are those who spend more than ten percent of their budget on
gasoline. This group is also concentrated in the lower expendi-
ture deciles; in the five lowest deciles, nearly one household in
six has a high expenditure share. These high-outlay households
typcially live in rural areas and are more likely to be in the
South than in other regions. Holmes (1976) provides a more
detailed analysis of the characteristics of high—gasoline—outlay
households, along with an analysis of their burdens following the
1974 oil price shock. 12




     12Hj11 (1980) examines the same households five years later
to investigate various responses —— mobility, car purchase, etc.
-- to higher gasoline prices.
                                 14

2. Why Do Income and Expenditure Rankings Differ?
    The dramatic differences between income and expenditure
based incidence measures suggests the need to analyze why income
and outlay rankings diverge. This section considers two aspects

of this question. First, it reports the joint distribution of
household income and expenditure ranks, to determine whether
differences between the income and expenditure incidence results
are due to relatively few households whose income and outlays
differ. Second, I present a more detailed analysis of the
households whose expenditure ranks exceed their income ranks,
since the characteristics of these households could affect the

interpretation of the results.
     Table 4 reports the joint distribution of income and expen-
diture decile ranks across households. The upper panel shows how
households in a given income decile, corresponding to each row,
are allocated to expenditure deciles. The lower panel reports
the reverse calculation, indicating how the households in a given
expenditure decile are distributed across income deciles. In
each case (but for rounding) the row entries should sum to 100.

     Several features of the table are noteworthy. First, just
over sixty percent of the households in the bottom income decile
are also in the bottom expenditure decileJ3 Only fifteen

     13This should equal the percentage of the households in the
lowest expenditure decile who are also in the lowest income
decile. In Table 4, however, these numbers are not identical
(61% vs. 63%). The disparity arises because the households in
the CES sample are weighted by sampling weights. Although each
decile is defined to include approximately 10% of the total
sampling weight of the CES data set, there can be differences in
                                 15

percent of the households in the bottom expenditure decile are
ranked above the second income decile. This suggests a substan-
tial group of households who fare poorly on either incidence
measure. For this group, gasoline expenditures average 5.0% of
income and 3.0% of total expenditures.
     Second, the association between income and expenditure rank
is similar at the upper and lower ends of the distribution.

Seventy—six percent of the households in the bottom expenditure
decile have pretax incomes in the first or second income deciles;
77% of the households in the top expenditure deciles have incomes
in the top two deciles. These tables suggest that differences
between the income and expenditure incidence results, while not
due to a very small set of households, are due to approximately
one sixth of the sample for whom the income and expenditure

rankings differ substantially.
     The results in Table 4 do not provide any information on the
identity of households who are in the bottom income decile, spend
heavily on gasoline, yet do not appear in the bottom expenditure
decile. Finding that a significant fraction of these households
are experiencing transitory low income, or have expenditure in
excess of income as part of a lifetime plan, would strengthen the
argument for using expenditure rather than income measures of
incidence.




the effective size of the deciles owing to the nontrivial sam-
pling weight of some households.
                                  16

    Table 5 presents data on the households whose expenditure

ranking exceeds their income ranking.14 The elderly are the
single most important group, accounting for nearly one quarter of
those whose expenditure rank exceeds their income rank. Another
significant group, 7% of those with income ranks below their
expenditure ranks, consists of young households. These house-
holds may face heavy expenditure needs and rely on loans or
transfers from family members to finance this consumption. For
both the young and old households, total expenditures may provide
a much more reliable measure of long—run economic well—being than
current annual income. A similar argument might apply to the
households which are isolated in the last column of the table:
those with more than two children currently at home. For these
households, current expenditures may be high relative to their

average lifetime outlays.15
        Table 5 also presents information on the significance of

households who may be experiencing transitory income reductions.
Two percent of all households with expenditure ranks above their
income ranks are unemployed; another five percent report illness



     14The table does not describe the relationship between
income and expenditure. Most households whose expenditure rank
exceeds their income rank spend more than their income, but so do
some households with expenditure ranks equal to their income
rank.

     15An alternative approach to analyzing expenditure versus
income-based incidence measures would divide each household's
outlays by an "equivalent scale" based on its demographic charac-
teristics. This would avoid spurious findings of high expendi-
ture ranks among some large households.
                                17

of some type. For the latter group, medical needs may raise
current expenditures at precisely the time when the household's

earning capacity is reduced. Nevertheless, these categories
account for a relatively small part of the high spending/low

income group, suggesting that lifecycle factors are more impor-
tant than year-to-year income fluctuations in explaining diver-

gences between income and expenditure rankings.
     One feature of the Consumer Expenditure Survey data which
should be noted is the relatively substantial difference between
consumption and income for some non—elderly households, with
consumption greater than income. The source of these disparities
warrrants further exploration, but two possibilities should be
considered. One is that both consumption and income are measured
with error. This suggests using a weighted average of consump-
tion and income rankings to estimate a household's ability to
pay, with weights depending on the relative measurement error
variances. A second possibility is that income is systematically

under—reported, with marty households working part-time in the

"underground economy." This explanation implies a strong ration-
ale for focusing on consumption, rather than income, in the
incidence analysis.
                               18

3. Indexed Transfer Income and Gasoline Tax Burdens
    The standard analysis of excise tax burdens assumes that a

household's income is unaffected by changes in consumer prices.

This assumption is significantly in error, however, for low—
income households who receive indexed transfer payments. For
these households, tax-induced changes in consumer prices are
offset, perhaps with a time lag, by higher payments. This
important institutional feature of current transfer programs
affects the incidence of excise taxes, and also implies that the
revenue yield from higher taxes is smaller than partial equi-

librium calculations would suggest.
     Table 6 presents information on the role of indexed trans-

fers at different points in the expenditure distribution. The
results are striking. Two thirds of the income received by
households in the lowest expenditure decile is indexed. This
reflects the importance of elderly families who receive Social
Security, as well as other transfer recipients, in this group.
Such indexed transfers are also important for households in the
second expenditure decile, where they constitute 46% of income,

but decline at higher expenditure levels. Only three percent of
the income of households in the highest expenditure quintile is
indexed for inflation.
     Indexation implies that a gasoline tax increase which drives

up consumer prices will be partly offset by higher transfer
income. The extent of compensation is based on the average
expenditure patterns of all households, as reflected in the
                               19

budget surveys which underlie the Consumer Price Index. For

households with large gasoline expenditure, this offset will
therefore be incomplete; for other households with little or no
spending on gasoline and motor oil, the tax increase will yield

an income increase with no offsetting change in the cost of

living.
      The last two columns of Table 6 provide information on how
indexation affects the burden of the gasoline tax. Because the
natural metric is the fraction of a household's income which is
indexed, the second column in Table 6 reports gasoline expendi-

tures as a share of income for households ranked by total out-
lays. These data show that even the standard incidence measure,
outlays as a percentage of income, does not decline sharply as
one moves from low to high expenditure deciles. In this case,
the lowest expenditure decile devotes a lower share of its income

 to gasoline expenditures than any higher decile.
     The last column in Table 6 reports households' "unindexed

 exposure" to gasoline tax changes. This is defined as (gasoline
 spending/income) — indexed share of income*, where 8 is the

 average ratio of gasoline expenditure to income in the popula-

 tion. The parameter    measures the extent to which indexed

 transfer programs will increase in response to higher consumer
 prices for gasoline. For a household with only indexed income
 and with a gasoline-to-income ratio equal to the national aver—
                                20

age, higher gasoline have small distributional effects)-6 For a
household with no indexed income, unindexed exposure equals its
current spending as a fraction of income.
      Table 6 demonstrates that allowing for indexed transfers

substantially alters the estimated burden of higher gasoline
taxes. For households in the bottom expenditure decile, unin-
dexed exposure averages 0.7% of income. In the second decile,
this exposure is 2.8% of income, rising to 4.7% of income for
expenditure decile three. Gasoline outlays as a share of income
are range between 4.3% and 5.7% of income for the highest seven
expenditure deciles. For the households in these deciles,
however, the gasoline tax burden is significantly greater than
that for low—expenditure households. This casts serious doubt on
claims that the gasoline tax burdens "poor" households. While
the burden on very well of f households is no greater than that on
the

middle class, the middle class burdens in turn are significantly
greater than those at the bottom of the welfare distribution.

      Many policies could be combined with a gasoline tax to alter
the net distributional burden of a fiscal reform. Expansion of
the Earned Income Tax Credit, the Food Stamp Program, or explicit
income tax credits for fuel expenditures are all possibilities
which are addressed using microsimulation methods in CBO (1990)


     16Even in this case, there is a deadweight burden from the
tax as the consumer price is higher. The increased income from
transfers should be viewed as a lump—sum independent of the
household's gasoline purchases.
                               21

or KPMG Peat Marwick (1990). None of these "offset policies"
reach all of the households affected by higher gasoline taxes,
but all could be used to partly blunt the distributional ef-
fects.



4. Efficiency Considerations: The Role of CAFE Standards
     The foregoing analysis focused on the distributional effects
of gasoline taxes with no consideration of their efficiency

costs. Assessing the efficiency effects of higher gasoline taxes
is complex for two reasons. First, gasoline consumption produces
externalities including pollution and highway fatalities.
Whether higher gasoline taxes are efficiency—enhancing or ef—
ficiency—reducing is consequently an open question.17 Second,
some of the margins along which households might adjust to higher
gasoline prices, notably the purchase of more fuel—efficient
autos, are subject to other government regulation. Corporate
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards specify target fleet fuel
economy levels for U.S. and foreign auto producers, along with
corporate fines for failure to meet the targets.18 This section
argues that these standards are currently binding, and conse-
quently restrict the degree of consumer response to higher

gasoline prices.


     17Cordes, Nicholson, and Sammartino (1990) and CBO (1990)
discuss the external effects of gasoline consumption in some
detail.

     18These regulations are distinct from "gas guzzler" taxes
which are levied on particular auto models.
                                  22

     Studies of gasoline demand find significant differences
between long- and short-run price elasticities. This is because
short—run adjustment to higher prices consists mainly of reduced
driving, while the long—run adjustment involves changes in the
auto fleet and possible relocation of some households. Dahl's
(1986) survey concludes that the short-run elasticity of miles
driven with respect to gasoline prices is —0.3, while the long-
run value is —0.55. A number of studies, however, suggest that
the ratio of long- to short—run elasticities is greater. With
respect to the miles per gallon of new autos, Dahi reports a
short-run elasticity of +0.17, and a long-run value of +0.57.
Crandall, et al. (1986) use a quite different methodology,

calibrating optimal producer response to changing gasoline
prices, and estimate that a one percent increase in real gasoline

prices will raise average fuel economy by .72 percent. The net
effect of higher gasoline prices on gasoline consumption is the
elasticity of miles driven minus the elasticity of miles per
gallon with respect to prices. At least half of the long—run
adjustment thus takes the form of changing fuel economy demands.

      Higher gasoline prices beginning from current levels,
however, might not produce any change in fuel economy levels.
Table 7 shows the real price of gasoline (in $1989/gallon) for
the last twenty years, along with the fuel economy of new cars
sold in the United States. The table shows that in 1989, the
fuel economy of new cars sold in the u.s. averaged 28.3 mpg when
the CAFE standard was 26.5 mpg.
                               23

      The table masks important heterogeneity in the relationship
between fleet fuel economy and the CAFE standards across manufac-
turers, however. Greene (1990) notes that several manufacturers,
notably the Japanese, currently exceed the CAFE standards by a
substantial margin. The link between fuel prices and auto design
characteristics thus seems unaffected by CAFE standards for these
producers. Other auto firms, such as BMW and Mercedes, currently
violate the CAFE standards and pay significant fines their
behavior in response to higher fuel prices is likely to be
mediated by the shape of the CAFE penalty function. Finally, for
the three large U.S. auto manufacturers, fleet fuel economy has
moved in tandem with the CAFE standards. Leone and Parkinson
(1990) calculate that GM was constrained in two years, and
probably constrained in four more years, between 1979 and 1989.
They estimate Ford to have been constrained in 1985, and possibly
constrained in 1982, while they find no evidence that the con-
straints were binding on Chrysler.

     The net effect of fuel price changes on long-run gasoline
demand depends on the relative market shares of these manufac-
turers. An accurate analysis of the efficiency cost of higher

gasoline excises, however, clearly requires a careful analysis of
the interaction between prices and standards.
                               24

5. Conclusions
    One of the central shortcomings of this paper is its partial

equilibrium approach, particularly with respect to two issues.
First, higher gasoline taxes would probably result both in higher
consumer prices and somewhat lower producer prices for gasoline;
some of the burden would therefore be shifted to the owners of
current oil reserves. These owners are largely the equity—
holders in U.S. oil companies, who are relatively well-off
households in the expenditure metric, and foreigners. The
ability of the United States to export part of the burden of
higher gasoline taxes is an intriguing issue which demands
further study. Part of the burden of higher gasoline prices
might also fall on owners of relatively low-mile per gallon
autos. Kahn (1986) provides clear evidence that used car prices
respond to gasoline prices. Because autos are the second most

important asset in many households' portfolios, significant price
changes could have important distributional consequences.
     The second general—equilibrium issue which deserves analysis
concerns the use of gasoline as an intermediate input. This
paper has focused only on households' direct consumption of

gasoline, neglecting the implicit consumption in many goods which
have been transported via gasoline—intensive means. A more
complete analysis recognizing indirect consumption could be
performed using input—output tables and a computational general
equilibrium model.
                               25

     This paper also raises more general issues about the rela-
tive merits of income and consumption for measuring household

well—being. The long-standing debate about the relative merits
of taxing income and consumption provides a familiar base from
which to argue for modifications in standard incidence analyses.

However, despite the efforts reported in this paper, the source
of differences between consumption- and income—based expenditure

analyses remain unclear. Further research is needed to resolve
these differences.
                                     26

                                 References

Browning, Edgar K. and William R. Johnson, The Distribution of the Tax Burde
     (Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1979).
Carroll, Christopher and Lawrence H. Summers, "Consumption Growth Parallels
     Income Growth: Some New Evidence," forthcoming in B. Bernheim and J.
     Shoven, eds., The Economics of Saving (Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press, 1990)
Congressional Budget Office. The Budgetary and Economic Effects of Oil Taxe
     (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1986).
Congressional Budget Office. Federal Taxation of Tobacco. Alcoholic
    Beverages and Motor Fuels.  (Washington: 1990).

Cordes, Joseph, Eric Nicholson, and Frank Sammartino, "Raising Revenue by
    Taxing Activities with Social Costs," National Tax Journal 43 (1990),
    343—356.

Crandall, Robert W., Howard Gruenspecht, Theodore Keeler, and Lester Lave,
    Regulating the Automobile (Washington: Brookings, 1987).
Dahi, Carol A., "Gasoline Demand Survey," Energy Journal 7 (1986), 67—82.
Davies, James, France St. Hilaire and John Whalley, "Some Calculations of
    Lifetime Tax Incidence," American Economic Review 74 (1984), 633—649.
Greene, David L.., "CAFE or Price? An Analysis of the Effects of Federal Fuel
    Economy Regulations and the Gasoline Price on New Car MPG, 1978—89,"
    Energy Journal 11 (July 1990), 37—57.
Hill, Daniel. "The Relative Burden of Higher Gasoline Prices," in Greg J.
    Duncan and James N. Morgan, eds., Five Thousand American Families:
    Patterns of Economic Progress, Vol. VIII (Ann Arbor: Institute for Socia
    Research, 1980)
Holmes, John, "The Relative Burden of Higher Gasoline Prices," in Greg J.
    Duncan and James N. Morgan, eds., Five Thousand American Families:
    Patterns of Economic Progress (Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research,
    1976)

Johnson, Paul, Steve McKay, and Stephen Smith, "The Distributional
    Consequences of Environmental Taxes," Working Paper No. 23, Institute
    for Fiscal Studies, London, 1990.
Kahn, James, "Gasoline Prices and the Used Car Market: A Rational
    Expectations Asset Price Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics
    101 (1986), 323—341.
Kasten, Richard, and Frank Samrnartino, "The Distribution of Possible Federal
    Excise Tax Increases," Congressional Budget Office, 1988.
                                      27


KPMG Peat Marwick, "Changes in the Progressivity of the Federal Tax System,
    1980 to 1990," prepared for the Coalition Against Regressive Taxation
    (Washington, DC: 1990).
Leone, Robert A., and Thomas W. Parkinson, Conserving Energy: Is There a
    Better Way? A Study of CAFE Regulation (Arlington, VA: Association of
    International Automobile Manufacturers, 1990).
Pechtnan, Joseph A., Who Paid the Taxes: 1966-1985 (Washington: Brookings
    Institution, 1985).
Poterba, James M., "Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of
    Excise Taxes," American Economic Revie\j 79 (1989), 325-330.
Sammartino, Frank, "The Distributional Effect of an Increase in Selected
    Federal Excise Taxes," Congressional Budget Office Staff Paper, 1987.
Slesnick, Daniel T., "Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Post—war United States,
    mimeo, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 1990.
                                     28

Table 1: Gasoline & Motor Oil Expenditure/Income, by Income Decile, 1986
Income Decile               Gasoline Expenditure/Income
     1                               11.44%
  1 (excluding 0—5%)                  6.74
     2                                6.54
     3                                6.36
     4                                6.08
     5                                4.97
     6                                4.69
     7                                4.38
     8                                3.75
     9                                3.56
    10                                2.40

Source: Author's tabulations using 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey. See
text for further details.
                                    29

    Table 2: Gasoline & Motor Oil Expenditure/Total Expenditure, 1986
                                   Expenditure Definition
Expenditure     Including Imputed    Including Imput-     Excluding Imputed
  Decile      Rent, Excluding Autos   ed Rent & Autos        Rent & Autos
   1                  3.88                  3.70               4.25
   2                  5.67                  5.34               6.52
    3                 5.83                  5.53               6.84
    4                 6.12                  5.67               7.55
    5                 5.55                  5.17                6.62
    6                 5.64                  5.20                7.04
    7                 5.42                  4.94                6.72
    8                 4.85                  4.43                5.99
    9                 4.82                  4.47                6.09
   10                 3.42                  3.20                4.25

Average               5.12                   4.76               6.19

Source: Author's tabulations using 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey. See
text for further details.
                                        30

        Table 3: Dispersion of Gasoline & Motor Oil Expenditure Shares

Expenditure          Percent of Consumers with Gasoline Expenditure Share
 Decile                         Zero                  > 10%
    1                           36.5%                 14.2%
    2                           11.3                  15.6
    3                            8.4                  15.5
    4                            0.7                  16.0
    5                            4.3                  11.1
    6                            1.9                   9.4
    7                            1.2                   6.7
    8                            0.6                   5.1
    9                            0.6                   5.7
   10                             0                     0

Source: Author's tabulation using 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey. House-
holds are grouped into expenditure deciles based on total expenditures
including rental equivalent value of owner-occupied housing, but excluding
automobile purchases.
                                       31
         Table 4: Joint Distribution of Expenditure and Income Deciles

                                 Expenditure Decile
Income
Decile          1     2      3     4        5    6     7     8    9      10


  1            61    16      9     4        3    3      1    0    1       3
  2            22    34     17    13     7       5      1    1    0       1
  3             8    25     19    17    12       7      6    2    2       1
  4             4    14     21    14    21       8      8    6    3       1
  5             1    10     19    16    18      15     10    7    4       2
  6             1     3     10    18    20      17     11   14    4       1
  7             1     1      2     8    10      19     24   20    9       7
  8             0     0      1     3        7   21     22   20   17       8
  9             0     1      1     1        2    5     13   20   32      25
 10             0     0      0     1        2    3      8    9   26      51


                                       Income Decile
Expenditure
Decile          1     2      3     4        5    6      7    8    9      10


  1            63    23      8     4        1    1      1    0    0       0
  2            15    33     34    14     10      3      1    0    1       0
  3             8    17     19    21     20     10      2    1    1       0
  4             4    13     18    15     17     19      8    3    1       1
  5             2     7     12    21     18     20      9    7    2       2
  6             3     5      7     8     15     17     18   21    5       3
  7             1     1      6     8     10     10     22   21   13       8
  8             0     1      2     6        7   14     19   20   21      10
  9             1     0      2     3        4    4      9   16   34      27
 10             3     1      1     1        2    1      6    8   26      51

Note: Entries in each panel denote the probability that a person in the
income or expenditure decile listed in the row nargin would be found in the
income or expenditure decile for each column. Calculations are based on
1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey.
                                    32

                 Table 5; Who Spends More Than They Make?

Expenditure Decile                              Share of Non—Elderly Who Are
- Income Decile      > Age 65   < Age 30      Unemployed   Sick   > 2 Children


        1                 25%            9%          1%        4%          18%
        2                 30             5%          2         6           10
        3                 35             3%          2         2           18
     4 or more            22             5%          0         7            9



Source: Author's tabulations based on 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey.
                                     33

              Table 6: Income Indexing and Gasoline Tax Burdens

Expenditure     Average Share     Gasoline Expenditure!   Unindexed Gasoline
Decile        of Income Indexed          Income             Spending/Income
    1               64.9%                  4.18                    0.70
    2               45.7                   5.24                    2.79
    3               29.4                   6.23                    4.65
    4               20.0                   5.78                    4.70
    5               16.5                   5.92                    5.03
    6               11.6                   4.94                    4.32
    7                6.4                   5.51                    5.16
    8                4.1                   4.72                    4.50
    9                3.1                   5.85                    5.68
   10                3.0                   5.17                    5.01

Average             18.0                   5.38                    4.41

Note: Column three is computed by averaging, for all households within a
decile, gasoline expenditure/income — indexed income share*5.38, where 5.38
is the population average ratio of gasoline spending to income as shown in
column 2. This implicitly assumes that population average spending
patterns are reflected in cost—of—living adjustoonts to transfer incone.
                                      34

Table 7: Gasoline Prices and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards
                  Gasoline Price/Gallon                Average Fuel
Economy
Year         Nominal          Real (June 1990$)   Actual     CAFE Standard

1970          0.36                    1.19            14.9
1971          0.36                    1.15            14.4
1972          0.36                    1.13            14.5
1973          0.40                    1.16            14.2
1974          0.54                    1.41            14.2
1975          0.57                    1.38            15.8
1976          0.60                    1.36            17.5
1977          0.63                    1.35            18.3
1978          0.66                    1.31            19.9              18.0
1979          0.88                    1.58            20.3              19.0
1980          1.22                    1.93            24.3              20.0
1981          1.35                    1.93            25.9              22.0
1982          1.28                    1.73            26.6              24.0
1983          1.23                    1.60            26.4              26.0
1984          1.20                    1.50            26.9              27.0
1985          1.20                    1.45            27.6              27.5
1986          0.93                    1.10            28.1              26.0
1987          0.96                    1.10            28.4              26.0
1988          0.96                    1.06            28.7              26.0
1989          1.06                    1.11            28.3              26.5
1990(June) 1.14                       1.14            ———
                                                      ———
1990(Sept)    1.35                    1.32

Source:  Gasoline price data from Data Resources, Incorporated. Data on
fuel economy is drawn from Motor Vehicle Facts and Figures (1989 edition)
                                                                             0

      (b
      C
     r-t-



      0
      ><
                                                                                         CD

                                                                                         C)
      (t                                                                     '—4
                                                                                         CD
                                                                                         C)-
            U)                                                                           CD
            Cb                                                                           -S
            C)                                                                           r*
            0                                                                            C)-
                                                                                         :3
                                                                                         CD


                                                                                         >(
                                                                                         m
            :3

            >(
                                                                             0'
                                                                                    C)
                                                                                    CD   N
c)   —,     :3




      --    C)




     :-0)
      (t                                                                                  CD

                                                                                          C)
                                                                                          CD
                                                                             r'-i        C)-

                                                                                          C)

       Ca                                                                                 3
                                                                                          0
                                                                                          C)


      0
                 N)   -   0   UD     -4    cn   U'   -    (.,   N)   —   0


                               exprditur   or ircome of
