                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




    YOUNGER HOUSEHOLDS SAVING: EVIDENCE FROM JAPAN AND ITALY




                          Albert Ando

                          Luigi Guiso
                       Daniele Terlizzese
                       Daniel Dorsainvil




                     Working Paper No. 3871




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1991




June 1991, revised August 1991. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3871
                                        October 1991




                   YOUNGER HOUSEHOLDS SAVING:
                  EVIDENCE FROM JAPAN AND ITALY




                             ABSTRAC1

     Both young and old consumers appear to dissave too little
for their behaviour to be consistent with a strict life cycle

model. We concentrate on young households and document their

behaviour drawing from Italian and Japanese data. We also
provide a theoretical set-up which can account for the observed

fact without relying on assumptions about the working of credit
markets or the degree of foresight of consumers.




Albert Ando, NBER                       Luigi Guiso
Daniel Dorsainvil                       Daniele Terlizzese
University of Pennsylvania              Bank of Italy
3718 Locust Walk                        Research Department
Philadelphia, PA 19104                  Via Nazionale, 91
                                        00184 Rome — Italy
                            —1—

I. Introduction (*)


          The life cycle theory in its present form generates,
at the individual level, the prediction that total saving,
over the whole consumer horizon, is zero, whereas consumers
reduce current savings in response to an increase in future
expected   income. At    the aggregate   level, two    facts
characterize saving: first, it is positive and represents a
non—negligible proportion of current income; second, the
saving rate is positively correlated with the rate of growth
of aggregate income. Reconciliation of the predictions of the
theory at the individual level with the above properties of
macro data is generally achieved through the aggregation of
consumers at different points in the life cycle. The process
of aggregation, in so far as productivity or population
growth  assign a larger weight to    consumers in their
accumulation phase, might produce aggregate savings which
tend to increase with growth.
        The effects of aggregation are, however, unambiguous
only when the preferred age pattern of consumption and the
lifetime earnings profile are such that families do not
dissave before retirement. If young individuals dissave
significantly, given the larger weight assigned to them in a
growing economy in the process of aggregation, total saving
might very well end up being negatively correlated with
growth.




(*)     This paper is a short version of a broader article,
which is part of a research project on savings sponsored by
the Bank of Italy. Basic computations using Japanese data and
the construction of the cohort means were completed in
1986—87 at the Osaka University, when Ando was given access
to data from the 1979 and 1984 national surveys of family
income and expenditure. We wish to thank Angus Deaton for
helpful discussions and all the partecipants in the Helsinki
conference   for their     comments. We    also thank  Luigi
Sciamplicotti for valuable research assistance.
                           —2—
       We will document, using micro data for Japan and
Italy, that families and single persons both save and
accumulate net worth throughout their working life, even when
they are quite young and their current income is low
relative to future income. Given this fact, the positive
correlation between the rate of growth of aggregate income
and the saving—income ratio can be explained quite easily.
        The need for explanation, however, moves a step back:
the earnings profile appears to rise steeply with age in most
countries, especially for those with rapid growth such as
Italy and Japan. It is then natural to expect (because of the
consumption smoothing principle) young people to dissave. We
must explain, therefore, why young people do not dissave.
This is a shift in emphasis from the recent literature, in
which much of the effort was devoted to devise modifications
of the life cycle theory that could accomodate the relatively
small dissaving by the older, retired families.
        The mere lack of dissaving by very young households
may be explained with the presence of liquidity constraints
or myopia. The ingenious interaction of liquidity constraints
with uncertainty, recently proposed by Deaton (1991), can
even explain, within a buffer stock argument, a limited
amount of saving; it is, however, probably inadeguate as an
explanation   of the significant    saving by very    young
households when their income is relatively low. We propose
instead an explanation based on the possibility that, for
very young households, due to the occurrence of (future)
opportunities not available today, higher future income might
be accompanied by larger "needs". The increase in current
consumption induced by an expected increase in future income
might then be small (or even negative). According to this
interpretation, consumption will then be concentrated in
those periods in which the opportunities are better. Opposite
to the consumption smoothing, we obtain what might be cal-led
a "consumption lumping" principle.
        In the next section we present evidence that young
                           —3—
families -and individuals with relatively low current earnings
anticipating rapidly increasing future earnings nevertheless
save a significant proportion of their current income, we
show that the reaction to anticipated changes in income is
negligible for very young families; it becomes however
sizeable and significantly different from zero for older
cohorts. We also show that the level of net worth has a
strong  positive effect on consumption, indicating that
families do follow a fairly long plan of asset accumulation.
These evidences cast doubts on the hypothesis of myopic
behaviour. On the other hand, given that the consumption
level of very young households (aged less than 30) is
relatively low, the fact that the consumption level of the
slightly older age group (30—34 years old) remain quite low
might be explained by the presence of habit persistence. In
our data for Japan we do not find, however, evidence
supporting this hypotesis.
        In   the last section, we outline a theoretical
explanation and offer an illustative example. We conclude
with a general discussion where we contrast our theoretical
explanation and empirical findings about young consumers
behaviour against alternative explanations put forward in the
recent literature.


II. The saving behaviour of younger households: an empirical
     assessment

        In a recent interesting paper Carrol and Summers
(1991) have presented a composite and well documented picture
of consumption behaviour that is difficult to square with
standard versions of the permanent income or life cycle
theories. In particular they rely on micro data to show that
the basic implication of a simple life cycle model is not
borne out: there seems to be little evidence of low frequency
consumption smoothing, as both young and older households
dissave too little.
                              —4—
        The behaviour of the second group has been thoroughly
investigated, both empirically (Ando, Yamashita and Murayama
(1986), Ando and Kennikell (1986), Hayashi (1986), Hayashi,
Ando and Ferris (1988) among others), and theoretically
(Davies (1981), Hurd (1986)).
           Here we shall focus on the behaviour of younger
consumers.     Their behaviour is  crucial to assess   the
consequences of aggregation for the level of total savings
and its correlation with the growth of income. In principle,
both positive savings and the positive correlation with the
growth rate of the economy are consistent, in general
equilibrium, with a representative agent model; the latter
seems to require, however, too large a sensitivity of
consumption decisions to interest rates as compared with the
one usually estimated (or too large movements in interest
rates as compared with those currently observed; see also
Carroll and Summers, 1991). The aggregation of consumers at
different points in the life cycle appears thus to be the
most reliable mechanism to explain the macro correlation
between savings and growth.
           On a different level, whereas simple extensions of
the life cycle theory have been able to account for the small
dissaving of the old, the behaviour of the young has proven
to be more difficult to rationalize. Liquidity constraints or
myopia are often invoked to explain the lack of borrowing out
of the higher future stream of income; while useful, these
hypotheses are not entirely convincing (see the discussion in
the last section). We hope that a greater emphasis on young
people   would   eventually   lead   to   discriminate among
alternative interpretations of the saving behaviour.


11.1 Descriptive evidence: high saving rate by the young and
     a potential sample selection bias

           Table 1 shows savings rates by age for Italian and
Japanese     households,   together   with the   cross—section
                            —5—
earnings   profile. The latter appears to be increasing with
age. Adjusting it for increases in productivity, given the
high growth experienced by both countries,would make the two
profiles extremely steep, especially at the beginning of
life1.  One would consequently expect    life—cycle young
consumers to decumulate substantial amounts of wealth (if
endowed with any at the beginning of their working life) or
to run negative saving.
       The evidence is just opposite: younger households
save a considerable proportion of their current income.
Combining cross—section data for different years and looking
at the annual change in net worth of the average household
belonging to the specific age cohort, while giving a rather
different measure of net accumulation, confirms the basic
fact: in spite of steep earnings profiles young households,
both in Italy and Japan, accumulate wealth2.
        A potentially important bias might arise from the
fact that younger consumers still living as dependents within
their families    do not appear in the surveys. If (for
whatever reason) they tend to consume more than what they
earn (or, equivalently, if the young consumers who become
independent are thriftier), the observed "oversaving" of the
young might be a statistical illusion. Given the tendency for
younger consumers both in Japan and Italy to live in their
parents house long after they start working, this sample
selection problem might potentially be important.


1.  Assuming a rate of growth of productivity of 4 % in
Italy and 5 % in Japan (approximatly equal to the average
growth of GDP per worker in the last 30 years in the two
countries) the adjustment for growth would lead to a level of
earnings in the oldest age bracket 2.2 times as large that in
the youngest age bracket in Italy, and 2.6 times in Japan.

2.   The larger estimate for saving implied by the change in
net worth is partly due to capital gains on housing which
have been substantial in Japan and Italy between the two
years used to construct the figures reported in the table.
                            —6—
          Before we proceed with more elaborate analysis, we
check in the simplest possible manner if the living status of
younger dependents makes a significant difference. Table 2
shows mean values of some key variables for a number of
relevant groups. Our comments refer to Japan but, as can be
easiley checked, the same conclusions hold for Italy. Row A
corresponds to families with one working adult aged 25—29
living in it (extended families), row B corresponds to pure
nuclear families, while row C corresponds to a single,
working person aged 25—29 living alone. For row A the
saving—income ratio is .22 while for the sum of rows B and C,
which represents a fictitious family comparable with the
extended one, it is .16. Thus, while the level of income is
basically the same (5,556 for row A and 5,731 for the sum of
rows B and C), the saving—income ratio is 6% higher for the
extended families. The conclusion that we draw from this
table is that, if anything, younger working dependents save
proportionately more than independent consumers of comparable
age. Overall, it is thus difficult to interpret the behaviour
of young households within a standard consumption smoothing
paradigm. However, the issue deserves further scrutiny, both
because     of   the                       of univariate
                       potential shortcomings
correlations and of the need to consider the response of
younger consumers to (expected) future changes in earnings.

11.2 Young consumers and future income changes

          If longitudinal data on both earnings and consumption
were available it would be possible to. construct measures of
expected future earnings for each single consumer, and test
for   its effect on current      consumption. Unfortunately,
longitudinal data on both consumption and earnings are not
usually available. However, combining—cross sectional data at
different points in time it is possible to construct cohort
average data for consumption and current and future earnings.
        The basic idea is illustrated in fig. 1, which shows
                           —7—
two cross—section patterns of earnings for individuals (the
head   of the   household)   with specific characteristics
(occupation, education etc.) over all ages. Suppose that the
cross—section age—earnings profile aa was observed in year t,
and bb was observed in year t+h (to be specific, let t be
1979 and t+h be 1984, the two years of the available japanese
surveys). Suppose further that the position p represents the
actual earnings of a group of individuals who are aged 35 in
1979. They will be aged 40 in year 1984, and hence they will
occupy the position s in 1984. This position we take to
represent the expectation, in 1979, of five years ahead
earnings, held by individuals who, in 1979, occupy position
p. Note that this group's path of earnings over life is
considerably steeper than aa or bb3 and is in general quite
different from the path that would be obtained by adjusting
aa for the growth in the overall productivity of the economy.
        The   main   problem   in   using   a   sequence    of
cross—sections to approximate panel data comes from the
possibility that, between 1979 and 1984, the household
changes its type: single persons may get married, married
couples may divorce and so on. Since the mean income of those
different household types is different, a careful handling of
the type changes is required to obtain reasonable estimates
of   expected future income. Clearly, the       issue is of


3.   The movement from position p to position s represents
two factors. The first, from s to q, is the age effect, which
might include improvements in skills and therefore an in-
crease in productivity that cannot be distinguished from
other components of age effects. The second component of the
movement, from q to s, is the productivity increase specific
to calendar year, which is common to all members of the work
force independently of age. Distinguishing empirically bet—
ween these two sources of earnings change could be important
since it is likely that changes due to calendar year
productivity increases are more likely to be subject to
surprises. Thus, the distinction is potentially fruitful to
assess   the   "surprise"   explanation   of    the   observed
savings—growth correlation in high growing economies.
                            —8—
particular relevance for younger consumers who are at the
center of our attention4.
        Consider then the population of ordinary households
(husband and wife, their children and perhaps other members)
aged between 30 and 35 that existed in 1984. Let us focus our
attention on the male head of each household. He could have
come from one of four groups. Firstly, he may have already
been the head of the same household. Secondly, he could have
been a single person living independently. Thirdly, he could
have been a working dependent adult in someone else's
household, most often that of his parents'. The fourth
possibility, namely, the person may have been a non—working
adult depedent in some one else's household, can be dismissed
for our purposes since there are very few non—working
dependent adult males once they reach the age of 25.
        We shall refer to type i families, i=(OF, SF, DA),
and type j families, j(GOF, GSF, GDA), where the symbols
represent,   respectively, ordinary families with married
couples at the core, male single person families, and working
male dependent adults in 1979 and 1984, and G is mnemonic for
grown. They are aged 25—29 in 1979, and 30—34 in 1984.
        We do not have information to match precisely each
type i family with a type j family. By making strong
assumptions,   we   can   however   deduce   the   transition
probabilities. We assume, first of all, that all families in
OF will move to GOF. Since the divorce rate in Japan is
extremely low and the mortality rate at such young age is
also low, this seems a reasonable assumption. We also assume
that families in SF will be either in GSF or in GOF and
families in DA will be either in GDA or GOF, that is we
assume that a single person does not become a dependent
adult, nor a dependent adult becomes a single person. This


4.   A similar problem, arising from older people merging
into one of their children households, has been tackled by
Ando (1986) and Hayashi, Ando and Ferris (1988).
                           —9—
may not be a reasonable assumption, but without it, it would
become extremely hard to proceed. The possible transition
paths are illustrated in Figure 2. From the number of
families and individuals belonging to those groups, obtained
from the 1980 and 1985 censuses, we estimated the transition
probabilities, that are then used in the computation of the
expected future earnings of each type i family. We verified
that the number of corresponding families and individuals in
the samples of the National Survey of Family Income and
Expenditure, multiplied by sampling ratios, approximate the
census figures fairly well.
        The remaining step is to divide these family types
into smaller groups so that we can construct a set of cohort
means to be used in the estimation. We have used occupation,
location, and the number of children as classificatory
variables, and we have managed to obtain about 70 cohorts
both for the 25—29 years old age groups, and the 30—34 years
old groups.
        As mentioned before, we depart in this paper from the
standard approach in costructing expected earnings, that
adjusts for the general productivity gains over time the
cross—section pattern of earnings followed by families with
characteristics similar to those of  the household in
question. For each cohort in 1979 the level of future
expected earnings is defined as the mean earnings of the
corresponding cohort in 1984, using as weights the transition
probabilities computed as shown above; that is we assume a
perfect foresight forecast5.


11.3 Empirical findings.

        The regression results relative to the 1979 survey


5.     This procedure has the shortcoming that it covers only
five years. For the young groups with which we are dealing
here, the relevant expected earnings should cover the major
portion of their working life and hence some 30 years or so.
                           — 10 —


are shown in Table 3, part A. Regressions were run dividing
all variables by earnings in 1979 (Y79). For ease of
interpretation, results are presented rescaled to the level
form. The two columns refer respectively to households whose
head is aged 25—29 and 30—34 in 1979. considering first the
younger consumers, we note that the coefficient of current
earnings (after the terms KID and MEM are taken into
account), is   .584, against the .052 for expected future
earnings (denoted as EY84). Further, the coefficient of EY84
is not at all significant. This result appears to confirm the
contention of Carroll and Summers (1991) and Carroll (1989)
that expected future income does not have much effect on
consumption or savings. On the other hand, the coefficient of
net worth in 1979, W79, is quite large, .05, with a t—ratio
of 4.58. This means that, contrary to the shortsightness
explanation, younger consumers plan for the future, although
they adjust very slowly if they find that there is a
significant gap between their current and planned pattern of
asset accumulation.
        The most troublesome feature of this regression is
that the constant term is quite large, as it accounts for
about 20% of the mean value of the dependent variable. In
earlier work by Ando, Yamashita and Murayama (1986), using
the 1979 survey, a similar equation for the age group 20—29
was estimated, although EY84 was not present. The constant
was significant, and they showed that it represented the
effect of the position of the household in the distribution
of earnings. W believe that the large constant terms on the
regression estimates reported here result from the sane
cause.                -



       For the older age group, the coefficient of current
income is considerably smaller (.294, taking into account
terms in KID and MEM), and the coefficient of expected income
is large, .169, and significant. This is a clear indication
that the older group takes future earnings into account in
determining their consumption. Net worth hasa somewhat
                              — 11 —


smaller  coefficient, but it remains an important variable in
the regression6.
       It is difficult to square these results with the
hypothesis of myopic behaviour. Also, simple models of
consumption      with   liquidity      constraints appear   to be
contradicted7. It is interesting, in our view, that the
effect of future earnings on current consumption becomes
significant only for households who are at a later stage of
their life cycle, although they are still quite young. A
possible explanation is that liquidity constraints, while
binding for very young households, cease to bite fairly soon.
An alternative one, that is consistent with the approach
presented in the next section, turns on the possibility that
young   consumers might    be   motivated to save    by the
anticipation of future opportunities that might be lost, or
ineffectively exploited, had too large a fraction of lifetime
resources been already used up. The reaction of consumption
to future expected income might be initially negligible, as
changes in income could be matched by changes in consumption
opportunities.  We argue, however that, due to learning, the
flow of new opportunities that the consumer can reasonably
anticipate drains away as he grows older. As a result, the
standard life cycle behaviour would then tend to prevail.
          In table 3, part B, the results relative to the 1984


6.   To assess whether changes in earnings due -to calendar
year increases in productivity have a different impact on
consumption from changes due to the age effect, according to
the classification made in note 3, we have run a regression
splitting EY84 into these two components. Unfortunately, for
the present such a distinction has been possible only for the
younger group; in this case both components turned out to be
not significantly different from zero.


7. A positive effect of future expected income on current
consumption might be consistent with            the presence of
liquidity constraints in the Deaton's model, in which the
anticipation of higher future income reduces the need for
precautionary saving.
                           — 12 —


survey   are reported. Since we have       only two surveys
available, we cannot construct the perfect foresight earnings
forecast for the 1984 cohorts. We investigate instead the
possibility that past consumption (C79) might have some
effect   on   current    consumption,    representing   habit
persistence.  It   turns    out   that   C79 is    completely
insignificant in these regressions and we conclude that, for
this set of data, habit persistence is not an important
factor in the determination of current consumption.


III. The life cycle of opportunities

        In the conventional approach, economic agents are
identified with a given preference relation defined over a
given   consumption  set.   Although this   description is
inherently static, some of the goods could be interpreted as
available only in the future, and the preference relation
could be dependent on the state of the environment, as the
description of each good involves the contingencies in which
it will be consumed.
        However, in the absence of a complete set of markets
in which, at the beginning of the agent's life, all the
commodities so defined can be exchanged, it seems more
natural to define not only agents' decisions but also their
"identities" as coming out of a sequential process.
        At the start, each agent has a preference relation
involving a (usually small) set of commodities, namely those
with which h is most familiar, perhaps because of his
parents' behaviour. But he probably does not have a clear
opinion about other goods, certainly those not yet invented
but also, and more significantly, all those consumed in
different social strata.
        As the agent grows older and follows his career, his
position in the social ladder changes, he moves to different
places and the composition of his family evolves; he gets
acquainted with new people, observes new habits and comes
                           — 13 —


across new consumption patterns. Indeed, the agent's own
social identity, as defined by his relationships with other
people, can be said to evolve with age.
        More precisely, at the beginning of their working
lives individuals face a wide range of possible paths all of
which might involve not only different patterns of lifetime
earnings, but also a different structure of needs and
preferences. Later on in life some of the original
possibilities, as a result of both choice and chance, will no
longer be feasible, and each individual will eventually
settle down in what might be called a "social niche".
        The social niche to which the individual belongs
entails, to some extent, a preferred consumption structure
and, for this reason, we interpret the discovery of the niche
as   providing the opportunity for improving consumption
choices. It is then intuitive that people have an incentive
to postpone some of their purchases until they have learned
in which social niche they will end up.
        To use a more formal language, we are describing a
situation in which the utility is the joint product of
consumption and (social) environment. The two "factors" are
complementary,   so that a better environment entails higher
marginal utility of consumption.

111.1 An example

        Several models exemplifying these ideas could be
constructed.  The social niche, for instance, might be
identified with the agent's "true tastes", unknown at the
beginning of his life and progressively discovered.
        It can be shown (see for details Ando, Guise and
Terlizzese (1991)) that the opportunity of learning about his
own preferences leads the younger consumer to      accumulate
resources for the time when, having grown up and "discovered
himself", he will be able to extract higher utility from
consumption. Ignoring the evolution of preferences over the
                              — 14 —


life      cycle leads to underpredict the saving of the young
cohorts ( or to overpredict their borrowing).
        A second example, presented here in more detail,
identifies the niche with the job position. Suppose that
there are various jobs in the economy differing in income,
working conditions and the overall social environment with
which    they are associated8. They can often be ranked
according to a dominance criterion, as some involve both a
larger income and a nicer environment. To take one example,
consider    the difference between a mine     worker and a
university teacher. The switch from the first to the second
job,       quite apart from the higher income, dramatically
improves the health conditions and the cultural and social
attributes of the living environment. Similar, though less
extreme, differences are usually involved in the change from
a job as an unskilled worker to a skilled craftsman, from the
latter to a managerial position and, more generally, whenever
there is a change in the type of job.
        We believe that it is reasonable that the better the
conditions in which work takes place and the stronger the
positive   externalities generated by the relationships with
colleagues and the social circle associated with a given job,
the higher is the utility of each unit of consumption ( on
this point, see also Arrow, 1974).
        Consider then an economy in which there are two types
of jobs,    and c3, corresponding to two rungs of the social
ladder (high and low respectively). 5h dominates l' as it
entails both a better environment and a higher income (y >
y1). Consider also an agent who lives for 2 periods, consumes
cj
     in   period i (i—l,2) and works, in the first period, in job
a1. The future can, however, bring the opportunity of social
promotion and the agent anticipates that, with probability p,


8.   The idea that there is a strict connection between the
consumer job position and the social niche he belongs to,
i.e. his social status, is emphasized by Solow (1990).
                              — 15 —


he will be offered the better job.
           Following our previous discussion, we assume that


        (1)    ul(c,ah) >u1(c,c1)

where   u(•) is the instantaneous utility function, the
subscript on the u(•) denotes partial derivative9
        The agent then solves:


        flax   u(C,c1) + (l—p) u(c1,c1) + p u(c2,oh)

        s.t. c+s —           y1
                Cl
                       —
                       —
                             yl+S
                C2

where s represents saving and, for the sake of simplicity,
the subjective discount rate is set equal to the interest
rate and both equal to zero. This problem, under assumption
(1), will be referred to as problem (A).
        To have a benchmark, consider in the previous problem
the case in which the only difference between the two jobs is
the income they offer, so that the utility function is
independent of a and, in particular, assumption (1) is
replaced by:

        (2)     ul(c,ah) —   u1(c,51)
        We shall refer to this modified problem as problem
(B). It is useful to write down explicitly the first order


9.   We assume that the agent utility depends directly on his
position in the social ladder. Alternatively one might assume
that utility only depends on goods, some of which are not
marketable but can be acquired by status. A similar approach
is taken by Cole, X4ailath and Postlewaite (1991) who also
emphasize the interaction between agents social status and
savings decisions in a general equilibrium context.
                           — 16 —


conditions of both problems, for the sake of simplicity
assuming interior solutions:


 (Foci) u1(y1—s,a1)    (l—p) u1(y14-s,c1) + p ul(yh+s,ah)


 (F0C2) u1(y1—s,c1) — (l—p) u1(y1+s,a1) + p Ul(yh+s,al)

        For given p, let us call s*(p) the solution of (FOCi)
and s(p) the solution to (FOC2); the latter case is the one
usually considered in the literature.
        Considering now (FOCi) and using assumption (1), it
is straightforward to show that s*(p) is larger than s(p)
and, provided that the gain from social promotion is large
enough, s can be positive even when s is negative.
       As shown in Ando, Guiso andTerlizzese (1991) a
second interesting implication of the model is that the
effect on saving of an increase in future expected income
can be positive and, if negative, smaller in absolute value
than that found in the standard case.
        This is so when the increase in expected income is
assumed to result from an increase in the probability of the
better job. This follows from the fact that a rise in p
entails, together with the income increase, an increase of
the probability of the opportunity: the larger future income
goes hand in hand with a better future environment for
consumption, and this offsets, to some extent, the incentive
to borrow out of the larger income and increases current
consumption.

IV. Discussion                              -




        Simple   versions of the life cycle theory have
difficulty in explaining the observed facts regarding the
savings of younger consumers. An amendment of that theory
appears to be called for, and two main directions have been
explored in the literature: the possibility of liquidity
                             — 17 —


constraints   and that of myopic behaviour.
           Liquidity constraints represent a rather obvious
explanation of the relatively small amount of borrowing by
the youngest generations, as it simply postulates that they
cannot borrow.
        Although this explanation simply shifts the question
one step removed, as the presence of borrowing constraints
should itself be theoretically justified, it does capture
some important features of the actual working of markets.
       There are, however, grounds for doubting whether
credit market imperfections are enough to explain the
observed deviation of young people's behaviour from that
postulated by life cycle theory.
           Firstly, taken literally, the borrowing constraint
assumption   would imply that agents should be on the
constraint, consuming all of their income, whereas we observe
non—negligible savings, even in the early part of their
working lives. On the other hand, Deaton has recently shown
that the existence of positive savings can be made compatible
with binding liquidity constraints when there is uncertainty
and the consumers are either "impatient" or "imprudent"10.
Both assumptions are somewhat unusual, and their nature
implies that the savings thus generated are not likely to be
large11.
        Secondly,   and more importantly, the consumption
pattern of younger generations follows closely that of income
in   countries that differ    markedly in the    degree of
development of financial markets, so that the incidence of


10. The role of prudence is not directly examined by Deaton,
but a simple extention of his argument to a model with
finitely lived consumers establishes the claim.


11. In Deaton's simulations the amount of saving that can be
generated is in general smaller than 1% of (mean) income, a
relatively small amount when compared with the actual saving
of young households.
                              — 18 —


liquidity    constraints is likely to be very different.
        The second explanation taken up in the literature,
namely short—sightedness, simply implies that people do not
borrow against future income, as that is not foreseen.
        The status of this hypothesis is not clear, however.
It appears as an interpretation, superimposed on models whose
structure has little to do with myopic behaviour.
        On the empirical side, the short—sightedness is
invoked to explain a low (or zero) coefficient on expected
future income in regressions explaining current consumption
(see Carrol (1989)). In the same regressions, however,
current wealth appears to have a coefficient significantly
different from zero and smaller than one and this is not
consistent with short—sighted consumers.
        In this paper we have provided evidence that young
people's consumption responds to some extent to future
earnings.  We have also offered an explanation of the
apparently low responsiveness that preserves the forward
looking feature of the life cycle theory. We outlined a
theory where current savings can be interpreted as a choice
of flexibility, as the presence of future opportunities can
be an incentive to postpone consumption to those periods in
which it yields greater utility.
        The idea that resources should be allocated when they
produce more utility is, of course, not a distinctive aspect
of our theory, as it is just a rephrasing of the assumption
that agents maximize their utility. Life—cycle theory is
obtained when this assumption is coupled with an uneven
temporal distribution of resources (the hump shape of labour
productivity).  Implicit in the   argument is that    the
opportunities for consumption are evenly distributed over
time. Only under this assumption, infact, does one obtain the
well—known "consumption smoothing" principle.
        By     contrast, we assume that, due to learning,
consumption opportunities are unevenly distributed over the
life cycle. Together with the first, this assumption implies
                           — 19 —


that   consumption will be (relatively) concentrated in those
periods in which the opportunities are better. Instead of
consumption  smoothing, we obtain "consumption lumping".
However, in spite of this apparent contrast our model does
not necessarily contradicts life cycle theory. Quite the
contrary, it can be taken as complementing it in the
explanation of the behaviour of young people.
        It is also useful to contrast the theory explored in
this paper with the precautionary motive, which has recently
received considerable attention in the literature. When
(earnings) uncertainty is present, agents have an incentive
to save in order to "cushion" against fluctuations in
available resources. The idea often expressed as "saving for
bad times".
         The theory of saving we propose also considers
uncertainty, but the role of saving is to move resources
across time, from periods with less favorable opportunities
to periods with more favourable ones. Rather than "saving for
bad   times", we propose a rationale        for the opposite
behaviour, namely "savirg for better times".
        We do not think that the motivation for saving that
we   consider is    necessarily in     contradiction with  a
precautionary motive. The latter, as has recently been
recognized, mainly characterizes the behaviour of consumers
whose goal is that of smoothing fluctuations of income
occurring  at "high frequencies".  In our theory,  the
anticipation of better opportunities motivating the saving
decision can in principle refer to a point very far in the
future. Thus, we see our theory complementing, rather than
replacing the precautionary theory of saving.
                            — 20 —


                        References
Ando, A., Yamashita, M., ?Iurayama, J.: The savings of
Japanese households: a micro—study based on data from
the National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure,
1974   and 1979, Feizei Bunseki,      Economic Research
Institute, Government of Japan, N. 101, January, 1986.
Ando, A., Kennickell, A.B.: How much (or little) life
cycle is there in micro data? The cases of the United
States and Japan. in Dornbusch, R., Fischer, S. and
Bossons, J. -. Macroeconomics and finance. Essays in
honor of Franco Modigliani. Nit press, Cambridge, 1986.

Ando, A., Guiso, L., Terlizzese, D.: Young households
savings and the life cycle of opportunities. Evidence
from Japan and Italy, Bank of Italy, mimeo, 1991.
Arrow,   K.J.:   Optimal   insurance   and   generalized
deductibles, Scandinavian Actuarial Journal, 1—42, 1974.
Carroll, C.: Uncertain future income, precautionary
saving and consumption, mimeo, Massachusetts Institue of
Technology, 1989.

Carroll,  C.,   Summers,  L.H.: Consumption    growth
parallels income growth: some new evidence, in B.D.
Bernheim and J.B. Shaven (eds.) — National Saving and
Economic Performance, The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1991.

Cole, H.L., Mailath, G.J., Postlewaite, A.: Social
norms, saving behaviour, and growth, Caress Working
Paper, n. 91—14, University of Pennsylvania, 1991.
Davies,   J.:  Uncertain   lifetime, consumption    and
dissaving in retirement, Journal of Political Economy,
89, 1981.

Deaton,   A.S.:    Saving   and   liquidity   contraints,
Econometrica, 1991.

Hayashi, F.: Why is Japan saving rate so apparently
high? in S. Fisher (ed.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual. MIT
Press, Cambridge, 1986.

Hayashi, F., Ando, A., Ferris, R.: Life cycle and
bequest   savings,   Journal   of   the    Japanese   and
International Economies, 2, 450—491, 1988.

Hurd, M.D.: Saving and bequests, NBER Working Paper, n.
1986, NBER, 1986.

Solow, R.M.: The labour market as a social institution,
Basil Blackwell, Cambridge, Ma, 1980.
                         1979       1984

Ordinary families                   L!i
Single person families   IIIIIIII1II[   GSF j



Dependent adults
                                                                                                                              Table 1



          Younger households saving,    dispos.bl. income, wealth accumulation end earnings    by age.   Italy   and Japan


                                Italy                                                                  .lapan(3(
 Age of                       Annual                                Ag. of                     Annuel
the  head         Saving    change in    DiSposable     Earnings   the head     Saving        change in Disposable           Earnings
 of the                       wealth       income                   of the                    wealth        income
household           (1)        (2)                                 household      (4)            (5)


20   —
     23                         —
                  2,744                     21,391      15,253     20 — 24      405.2          584.4        1640.5           1577.1
24   —
     27           3,504        9,267        23,229      17,232     25 — 29      404.6          745.9        2252.6           2101.9
28   —
     31           5,076       12,238        27,109      20,103     30 — 34      391.4          952.5        2943.1           2713.9
32 — 35           6,205       10,103        29,613      23,488     35 — 39      478.3         1090.7        3579.1           3251.9
36 — 39           5,611       16,387                               40 — 44
                                            31,786      25,505                  586.1         1143.4        4044.3           3620.7
40 — 43           7,903        9,531        33,856      26,971



  sources           Indagin. aui bilanci dells faeiglie, Nanca d'Italia, 1987 end 1989. Date are expressed in
           thousands of 1987 liras.           National survey of fasiliy income and expenditure, 1979 and 1984,
           Status Dureeu, Gov.rn.ant of Japan. Thousands of yen.
  (1) Defin.d as household's disposabl. income sinus household's
                                                                  consumption expenditure.
  (2) ?.nnuslixed change in net worth between the end of 1987 and the end of 1909, in 1987
                                                                                           prices.
  (3) These figures represent s weighted evsrsge for
                                                         ordinary families (rerried couples, their children and
      other members such as retired parents), single person households, end working male adults living in ano-
      ther household. See also the explanation in the text on the construction of cohorts.
  (4) Defined as household disposable income minus (economic) consumption.
  (5( Weighted average of the annuslised change in net worth for ordinary and singl. households between the
      fourth quarter, 1979, and th. fourth quarter, 1985, in 1979 prices, and the saving of sale,
                                                                                                   working depen-
      dent adults (mostly living with their parents). For the last group, we are using saving defined   as income
      minus consumption since we do not have information on their assetS and liabilities.   This concept includes
      real capital gems and losses, especially on values of the residential property.
                                                                                                              Table 2

          Die,oeabl.  inc, coiwotäus          oat worth by typ. of      bowasbolda:     Italy (I) and   i'°   (3)




                                                  Disposable       Conzution            Net worth       Saving   rats
                                                    incoae
                                                   I       3        I        3          I        3       I          3

     A    Fasilies   with one   working
          adult aged   25—29                  46,633      5.556   29,644    4,334 150,075      23,979   .36         .22



     B Purenuclear       faaili.a             28,411      3,618   21,646    3,174     89,552   15,527   .24         .12

     C Single person fanilisa
       aged 25—29                             16,932      2,113   16,565    1,667     19,840    4,083   .02         .21



     D    Coabinad   households   (SiC)       45,343      5,731   38,211    4,841.   109,392   19,610   .16         .16




Source:   x:       Indagine sui bilanci       faniglie, Banca d'Italia, 1988 — Data for Italy are expressed
                                          deli.
          in   thousands of 1987 liras —            National survey of fanily incone and expenditure. 1979,
          Status Bureau, Governaent of Japan. 'thousands of 1979 yen.
                                                                                         Table 3


              Dependence of younger households consumption on               current earninga,
                           expected    future earnings and        net   vorth
                  (dependent    variable: consumption in the 1979 survey)


                                        Age of household head in 1979
          A
                                     25—29                                  30—34
                              n. of cohorts      62                     n. of cohorts • 71

   constant                          454.4                                  1082.8
                                      (5.17)                                  (7.15)

   '(79                    .506 +   .049 KID + .016 HEM            .198 +    .048    +   .125 HEM
                      (2.57) (5.45)            (.38)          (2.34) (7.61) (3.78)

   EY84                               .052                                     .169
                                     (.79)                                   (3.65)

   1179                               .05                                      .025
                                    (4.58)                                   (2.55)

   K2                                 .64                                      .72

   Mean of             ( C79        2517.1; KID 4.47;         (   C79       2880.6; KID —       1.52;
                           HEM.41)                                MEM=.41)

              Dependence of younger households consumption on current earnings,
                              past consumptionand      net   vorth
                 (dependent    variable: consumption in the 1984 survey)


                                        Age of household head in 1984
          B
                                     30—34                                  35—39
                              n. of cohorts     62                  n. of cohorts          71

   constant                         1081.0                                  1012.7
                                      (4.75)                                  (3.95)

   '(84                 .420 + .030 KID + .215 HEM                 .446 +    .030 +      .128 HEM
                      (6.08) (3.01)     (2.90)                (7.34) (3.44) (1.64)
   C79                              —.75                                      —.032
                                    (—.69)                                   (—.22)
   1184                               .037                                     .032
                                    (4.66)                                  (6.25)
   82                                 .71                                      .77

   Mean of             (   C84 — 2919.4; KID —1.54;           (   C84 — 3321.8; KID — 1.52;
                           HEM— .16)                              MEH .18]

Legend:
 KID — Number of children 17 years or younger;
 HEM — Number of members in the family, other than hushand, wife and
              their children.
